[Music]
Hey, you never did tell me who recruited
you, Neil. Only guess by now.
You did. You've known me for years. For
me, I think it's the end of a beautiful
friendship. But for me, it's just the
beginning. Let me get up to some stuff.
You're going to love it. You'll see.
Some people say they don't understand
tenant. Some people say they don't
understand everything in tenant. Some of
it. Do you understand everything in
tenant? You're not meant to understand
everything in tenner. It's not all
comprehensive. I have to have my idea of
it for it to be a valid productive
ambiguity. But the point of it is it's
an ambiguity. I'm Eric Boss and this is
the deep dive. I didn't understand
Tennet. I put hours into decoding the
timeline and the character paths. I've
rewatched and rewatched sequences until
they make sense. I've even translated
phrases into their phonetic inverses.
for example might stay.
But as soon as I step away from this
movie and then I tried to mentally
return to it, none of that logic math
has stuck because I have not used it
anywhere else in my life in the
meantime. Yet, I still love this movie.
I feel uneasy loving it despite not
understanding it. Does that make me a
Christopher Nolan apologist? A cinema
masochist? Probably yes and probably
yes. But I think I finally began to
figure out why Nolan made Tenant after
watching Oppenheimer who gets referenced
in Tenant. You're familiar with the
Manhattan Project. As they approached
the first atomic test, Oenheimer became
concerned that the detonation might
produce a chain reaction and coughing
the world. Now Nolan did dish with
Steven Coar about the link between these
two films and really all of his films.
Every time I make a film, I try to put
sort of I guess I try to leave each film
with interesting questions. I had the
reference in tennet because that moment
leading up to the Trinity test. The idea
that they sat in a room, well, when we
push this button, it's possible might
end everything. We used it uh as analogy
in tenant as a way into exploring a
science fiction could see. This is why
on this channel I reversed time to
analyze Oppenheimer first and then go
back to Tenant. Nolan's feelings about
J. Robert Oppenheimer's fateful decision
will be our road map as we revisit Tanet
as a story that tries to reconcile the
dread that the instrument of our own
annihilation is permanently intombed
under our feet sending us spinning madly
through mental loops as we race to
reseal the lid of Pandora's box. So join
me as we dive deep into Tenet. The film
opens with the Warner logo in red,
followed by Nolan's production company,
Syncopy, in blue to represent the
alternating red versus blue color scheme
of the two directions of time that this
movie flows in. Nolan and his composer,
Liv Vikurson, even clue us into blue
being the reverse time by reversing the
score when we first see Syncopy.
But the music we are really hearing is a
symphony at the Kiev Opera House warming
up. Of course, they didn't shoot this in
Kiev. They shot this in Talon, Estonia
at Lal, a venue originally built for the
1980 Moscow Olympics when Estonia was
still part of the Soviet Union, thus the
brutalist architecture. Opera is one of
the five words of the seder square from
which Christopher Nolan derived the
palendroic title of tenet. Satreo,
tenet, opera, roas. All words factor
into the plot of this film in some way.
The seder square was discovered in ruins
at various Roman era sites in Europe,
Asia, and North Africa with a cryptic
meaning. Some historians believing it's
a Greek cross translating to pattern,
the Lord's Prayer with A and O
symbolizing the alpha and the omega to
early Christians. But since the earliest
dated sader square was found in Pompei
from pre62 AD before Christians had
gotten there, some believe it was a
Roman word puzzle. And you can imagine
someone like Christopher Nolan looking
at this and be like, did time travelers
place it there by like reversing an
object through time to get there. One
can see how a relic surviving through
history would be of deep importance to
Nolan while breaking the story. But I
find it fascinating that the seder
square is never mentioned and never
shown in this movie. Like every other
screenwriter who stumbles upon a
historical curiosity cannot wait to have
some character expo dump some textbook
transcription to sound authoritative.
For example, Archimedes antica from
Indiana Jones in the dial of destiny.
But Nolan just leaves the sader square
in his research footnotes and doesn't
bog down the viewer by repeating
everything that he stumbled upon in his
research that inspired him. Now, you can
watch this whole opening scene and even
read Christopher Nolan's screenplay
several times like I did and still not
fully understand what the hell is going
on here.
So, for this video, let's just break
down what literally is happening.
Jefferson Hall plays an American spy
making contact with a Ukrainian general
in an opera booth to obtain what he
thinks is plutonium 241, but is actually
a piece of this movie's algorithm. That
spy has been exposed. And now armed
militants are taking siege of this
entire opera house, planning to kill
various hostages to cover what they
really want to do, take out the spy. Now
Nolan has not admitted to this but this
siege is based on the 2002 Nord O siege
at Moscow's Dubrovka theater by Chetchin
terrorists in which Russian security
services released sleeping gas and
stormed the building killing all 40
hostage takers but also tragically 132
of the actual hostages died many of them
just due to effects of the gas. So,
Christopher Nolan, who grew up loving
the 007 films and always dreamed of one
day making an international espionage
film of his own, is now reimagining that
tragic event as what if the whole siege
was really designed to cover the
execution of an American spy, and that's
why it was done so sloppily and security
forces were okay with some of these
hostages dying. In the world of spycraft
and espionage, for intelligence services
to admit they know an adversary is a spy
would sometimes mean exposing how they
learned that information and cutting
ties with one of their own valuable
assets in the field who acquired that
information for them. So that could be
why they'd have to mask this killing of
Jefferson Hall's character as just some
unrelated terrorist incident. John David
Washington plays the protagonist. That's
all he's ever named in this movie and in
the script. He's part of a CIA unit who
learns that this is going down. So, they
go in disguised as SWAT officers with
CORD, that's Ukraine's National Police
Rapid Response Unit, to extract the spy
and the package. But to do this without
those wanting to kill him knowing that
they extracted him and thinking that
they successfully killed the spy. But
this whole complicated little scheme is
essentially the mission of the final
battle to extract the completed
algorithm, but to still let the
detonation go off so that the people in
the future still think it went off as
planned and then don't get worried and
take any measures to alter their plans.
And appropriately in this movie's
timeline, the opera house siege is
taking place on the 14th and is
literally occurring on the same day as
the battle at Stall 12. Now, initially
this extraction plan works. Protagonist
gets to the spy in the booth and gets
into safety and he gets to the package
by doing this really cool slide move
under the countertop. But things get
complicated when the protagonist finds
these bombs being planted by other SWAT
officers around the venue. What's going
on here? This tells him that there must
be an additional hostile rogue third
party in the mix here and he suspects
his drivers who got him there might have
a few different teams in the field. So
he alters the exit plan. He has a spy
swap clothes with one of his own guys
and he sends the spy off with a package
and he goes to collect the bombs to save
the lives of all these innocent concert
goers. While doing this, something even
weirder happens. He's saved by a
mysterious figure with a talisman on his
pack who reverses a bullet from a bullet
hole through one of these rogue SWAT
agents who's about to kill the
protagonist. Huh. We'll learn what this
is, of course. Protagonist tosses the
bomb in the empty booth so that the
third party bombers still think the bomb
went off in the booth where they think
the spy would be. But the drivers
immediately know that this extracted spy
was a decoy. So, they shoot him in the
kneecaps and they take him to a trainard
to torture them. These drivers, part of
the third party SWAT bombers, we later
realize, must be part of Seder's crew.
They knew the spy would be there with
the piece of the algorithm because they
have already looped back to this moment
from the future. Okay, that's I think
everything that happens in the opening
scene, right? I I feel like I just broke
down one of the most complicated
episodes of like an HBO show and we're
only in like the first 10 minutes of the
movie. Yes, this is way too complicated
for any movie's opening scene. Nolan has
no qualms throwing us completely in the
deep end. I think it's just because this
guy has seen every 007 movie and this is
the only way a brain like Christopher
Nolan's feels satisfied to structure an
espionage scene without getting bored
for himself. He doesn't realize that for
us, we're okay with a much less
complicated opening scene. But for
Christopher Nolan, there must be
multiple layers of crossing and double
crossing and triple crossing with rogue
factions several chess moves ahead
through time standing by to steal the
bacon at the right moment or to make
sure the bacon gets into the right
hands. Okay, so now that we know what is
happening in the scene, let's actually
go through it to appreciate just some
really cool attention to detail. The
piece of the opening moments of an
orchestra warming up, which we as an
audience are accustomed to hearing at
the beginning of a show, like an
overture, is violently interrupted when
the conductor is shot.
Yes, I heard the gunfire the first few
times I saw this movie. I didn't realize
until now. They're shooting the poor
conductor. It feels like such a crime to
silence the artists who just want to
bring music into the world. But I think
there might be more to this. Tennet was
the first time Nolan shifted composers.
He was a longtime collaborator with Han
Zimmer. But for Tenant, he switched to
Levigornen, who had just won the Oscar
for Black Panther and would later win
again for Oppenheimer. And I think it
was a brilliant choice for this movie. I
don't think opening by offing the
conductor was a slate against Han
Zimmer. If anything, Nolan spared Zimmer
from having to score this tedious mind
[__] of a movie, but it's a signal to
the audience that this movie is going to
have a whole new sound to it. We have to
note that the protagonist's group of CIA
agents were already there before the
cord SWAT drives up as they knew that
this would be happening. Protagonist
flips a bullet out of his sidearm and
catches it, which later sets up his
reverse catching of the bullet in the
lab with Clemon's Post's character as
protagonist's unit blends in with the
other Ukrainian SWAT. In this shot,
Nolan keeps John David Washington's mask
unfoged and he uses these curved
overhead lights to direct our eye to our
focal character. You can see him
learning lots of lessons from his past
movies where he would just frustratingly
put characters in masks. He knows how to
direct our eye to the hero in other
ways. Protagonist greets the spy
Jefferson Hall who plays Shiovalier in
Oppenheimer with this unique exchange.
We live in a Twilight world and there
are no friends at dusk. A twilight
world. Of course, Robert Patson is in
this film, but really it's Nolan's way
of saying we live in a world constantly
on the brink of extinction. And as soon
as that sun dips beneath the horizon,
twilight transitions to dusk. So all
friendship and humanity would be gone at
this point, but right now in Twilight,
you still have a friend in me. This also
in a really fun way continues
Christopher Nolan's motif of the stages
of the night and how the presence or the
absence of light represents hope versus
despair. Like in the dark night, the
night is darkest just before the dawn or
an interstellar. The gravity so strong
it's always hidden in darkness behind
the horizon.
That's why we call it a black hole.
Okay.
If we see beyond thy horizon, we can't
coop. There are some things that aren't
meant to be known. Now, when one of his
fellow operatives saves him from the
rogue SWAT bomber, he says this. No
friends at dusk, huh? You'll do. Which
sets up moments later, Neil saving
protagonist by reversing the bullet.
Neil is a friend at dusk from a place
beyond the horizon that protagonist
cannot yet see. Protagonist meets the
others in the utility room. I've never
seen a capsulation like this. We don't
know how old it is, but it's the real
deal. Now, protagonist assumes that this
is a shell containing plutonium 241, but
the spy says that it's the real deal
because he probably scanned it with a
geer counter and thought that it
contained radioactive material when in
reality it would only be radioactive
because the pieces of these algorithm
were hidden in radioactive hotspots by
people in the future. Protagonist finds
the last bomb. We don't have to kill
these people.
And we focus on the talisman hanging
from the pack which the end of the film
will use to confirm this mystery savior
as Neil. I thought this was just like a
washer but it's actually a coin from
British India in 1943. And the orange
and red thread that connects it to the
pack is also from India. It's commonly
wrapped around the wrists of theists for
religious purposes. So logically what
must have happened here is Neil
performed his own miniature temporal
pinser. There must have been another
version of Neil from the other side
reversing through this chaotic shootout
who shot this bullet into the floorboard
to set it up for Neil to now reverse it
through the guy. Does it make total
sense for him to do that instead of just
looping back to this battle in one
direction and shooting him
unidirectionally? Not really, but it
looks really cool and it establishes the
visual concept of reverse entropy in
this film. So, a protagonist is taken to
the train yard where Nolan frames him in
the middle of one train going up the
tracks and another train moving in the
opposite direction. the way time and
reverse entropy flows in this film.
Really, everything in the scene is about
the manipulation of time, including the
driver's lines about the duration of the
torture session. Running fast.
We have to put it back 1 hour.
Literally, protagonist will spend this
movie running fast, often times an hour
back in time. When the driver pulled out
a mer looking for the cyanide pill given
to the spies in case they were caught,
he finds protagonists under his shoulder
padding, but the decoy still has his and
the protagonist sleeps to bite down on
it. He wakes up to find Martin Donovan
playing Fay, waiting for him to wake up
from his coma. Welcome to the afterlife.
Suicide pills
are fake.
Why? A test. Now, some have theorized
that protagonist did actually die and
everything we're seeing is the afterlife
of a spy. For Nolan, I think he's saying
that in a world where time is a flat
circle, we're all destined to end a
destruction anyway, and we're all living
on borrowed time, cycling back through
patterns of behavior, trying to find
meaning in it. Now, that's bleak or it's
beautiful, depending on whether you're
okay, not having free will. But I was
always curious about this test because
the pill protagonist bites was not
originally his pill. It was in the hands
of the decoy spy. That guy was wearing
the suit of Jefferson Hall's spy
character, and the pill would have been
sewn into his cloth. So, are all of the
pills the CIA gives out fake tests
designed to see which assets talk? Or
was Jefferson Hall's character, the
original 007 test candidate, and John
David Washington's character, took his
place through a random or a faded series
of accidents?
I mean, this movie only identifies the
hero as protagonist, and it might be
because he was never intended to be the
chosen candidate, but he proved his
worth anyway. Truly a man from nothing.
Also, Seder later has one of these CIA
poison pills, and we're left wondering
if all the CIA pills are fake or just
certain ones, and whether his plan to
kill himself would have actually worked
or not. I just like how these pills are
a fun little mystery in themselves in
the film. Now, Fay speaks cryptically at
first, framing things in terms of
temperature. Until we feel that heat, we
can never know.
There's a cold war, cold as ice. We see
fire versus ice. makes sense for members
of the tenant organization to see the
world as alternating paths of
thermodynamics because that's where we
derive the whole concept of entropy and
reverse entropy. Fay says that to even
know the war's true nature is to lose
and that his knowledge is divided. He's
hinting at the truth that to possess the
completed algorithm and to decode it
means that their mission has failed. In
a war against the future, they have to
be at peace with none of them knowing
the full picture so that knowledge would
never pass on and would forever stay
buried. Their goal is to permanently
stunt the Earth's growth and leave them
in a kind of technological dark age for
their own good. This is what Christopher
Nolan wishes he could do with a
Manhattan project and with nuclear
fishision. If only we could unknow
something. And Fay says, "All I have for
you
is a gesture in combination with a word
tenant. It'll open the right doors, but
some of the wrong ones, too. The right
doors, but some of the wrong ones, too."
is likely a veiled nod to the turnstyle
doors and the fact that they always come
in pairs. One for the forward moving,
one for the inverted. We're not even
sure if Fay knows that much. It seems
like it's his job just to be a
compartmentalized recruiter for the
tenant organization and to know the
stakes of it, but not the mechanics of
it. The protagonist is taken to a silo
in the column of a wind turbine. The
wind turbines, in addition to the
rotation providing a visual motion that
Christopher Nolan can reverse later in
the film and a reflection of humanity's
adaptation to a global climate crisis
that underpins the future society's beef
with the present seems at first like a
pointless step for the protagonist, as
he just waits in isolation for an
unspecified amount of time. Why was he
even here? Well, when you think back on
it, you realize, wo, the tenant
organization likely needed to keep him
isolated because a future version of
himself or maybe even several layers of
future versions of the protagonist were
actively looping back through time at
this point in too many places, and they
just needed to keep the still
uninitiated stage of the protagonist
isolated to prevent future exposure
until he could be properly briefed. In
this bunk, the protagonist finds a vial
with three more silver suicide pills.
And to be honest now, I'm wondering if
these are the same pills that end up in
the protagonist's mouth back in Kiev.
And as the future founder of the tenant
organization, he will at some point have
inverted back to that moment to place
the suicide pills with specific agents.
The protagonist gets taken by the
organization to the shore where using a
high viz vest and a car with a
programmed destination, he finds his way
to an office park where he meets Barbara
Kmon's Pozi who observes that a high viz
vest and a clipboard can get you in
anywhere almost. And I'm scared tenant.
A ridiculous phrase, but it is a common
in joke on film production sets and
studio lots that you can walk into any
building with just a walkie in your hand
and with confidence. So, Christopher
Nolan calling this an obscure tenant
might be his way of saying this is kind
of a film industry in joke. Barbara
explains that she only knows the how.
The what is his department. It's not
clear if she knows that he's the future
founder of the organization and that's
what she's alluding to by saying it's
his department. But the way Clemons
plays it, you get the sense that she
might feel that she's being tested by
the boss. She says that we're trying to
prevent World War II, nuclear holocaust,
something worse. Nolan uses the
Pandora's box of Oppenheimer as a frame
of reference for the science-based
threat of this film. Barbara
demonstrates inversion for the
protagonist by having him point an empty
gun at a chunk of wall filled with
bullets. And his intention to shoot is
what inverts the bullet back into the
gun. She places two bullets on the table
and explains that one is moving forward
in time, the other is inverted. The
protagonist is unable to distinguish.
How about now? I love this little shot
because Nolan obviously made Clmans drop
the bullet on the table and then reverse
that shot. So, Clemens had to say the
word now in reverse. So, wound. And the
awkwardness of that is why Nolan had to
cut around it so abruptly. But despite
the bullet being lifted off the table,
it still makes a clatter sound as if it
had just hit the table. How about now?
Barbara invites the protagonist to try
it himself. You have to have dropped it.
And just that intent is enough for it to
work for the protagonist, who now asks
about cause and effect and free will.
Well, it wouldn't have moved if you
hadn't put your hand there. Either way,
we run the tape. You made it happen.
This is how Christopher Nolan gets past
the muddy logic of fate and destination
in the movie. Within these localized
instances of interacting with inverted
objects, the future intent to do
something is how you can summon or
anticipate inverted bodies to your will.
And Nolan didn't just make this up. Alan
Watts 1972 lecture on time was a
groundbreaking touchstone in the way
some academics have rethought human
beings linear perspective of time as an
artificial construction. According to
Watts, cause and effect are really just
a man-made illusion. And in reality, the
past, the present, the future could all
be happening all at once. And this is
just how we see them. And so Christopher
Nolan posits that if you could just
trick your mind into thinking
deterministically, you can interact with
inverted objects this way. So Tennet's
weird time twisting logic makes it
possible to know what's coming and plan
for it. But you know, that's not how
life goes. We've all been sprinting for
a bus only to have our foot slam into
some gross puddle of curb water and then
your shoes are soaked and gross all day.
No thanks. If you can't know the future,
you can at least be prepared for it by
wearing a pair of Vessies. Vessie makes
waterproof sneakers that are stylish,
comfortable, and lightweight. They're my
go-to sneakers because there's no
compromise. They go with every outfit,
and they're durable enough to handle
everything your day might throw at you.
From dog parks to parking garages to
coffee shops and food truck festivals.
Lately, I've been wearing the weekend
sneaker. Like all Vessies, they're fully
slip-on, fully waterproof, and
manufactured without any PFAS materials.
And they're completely vegan. Step
confidently into daily life with the
waterproof Ultralight Vessie weekend
sneaker. With a one-year warranty and
worry-free 30-day returns, you're
covered for every journey. Discover more
at vessie.com/deepdive
and get 15% off your first pair. Barbara
explains that these objects are being
inverted via reverse entropy, which she
believes is a type of inverse radiation
triggered by nuclear vision. So, the
idea of entropy in thermodynamics is
that all systems in the universe are
shifting toward disorder. Physicists
debate whether entropy moving only in
one direction is a reflection of time's
actual linear nature like time causes
entropy or the cause of us only being
able to see time this way. Entropy
creates time. Nolan in this movie
assumes that entropy causes time. And if
entropy can be inverted by radiation,
the way that object moves through time
can be inverted as well. Reverse entropy
should not be possible according to
thermodynamics as it would mean a system
that is somehow gaining energy which
could only be possible if it is moving
backwards in time. In the background of
this lab, but never addressed by the
script, is a dry erase board with a
diagram of the Maxwell's demon thought
experiment that relates to this concept
of thermodynamics in which physicist
James Clerk Maxwell all the way back in
1867 tried to disprove the second law of
thermodynamics, which states that heat
always flows from the hotter regions of
a system to the colder ones, aka entropy
in action. Maxwell theorized of two
chambers and a door between them. A door
that could be controlled by a finite
being, an entity later referred to as a
demon by Lord Kelvin that could quickly
open or close the door to allow only
fastmoving molecules depicted in red to
pass through in one direction and only
slowmoving molecules depicted in blue to
pass through the other, which would
decrease the total entropy of the system
without applying any work. Like the
sader square I talked about before. This
is another example of the homework that
Nolan clearly did to inspire the script
for tenant but academic work that he
just references in subtle ways without
forcing the viewer into the lecture. Two
chambers, one red side, one blue side
obviously inspired the turn styles, a
demon door in between magically
reversing the entropy. I think Maxwell
was also partly the inspiration for Cat
and Sader's son being named Max. Barbara
says, "Don't try to understand it.
Feel it." This is reportedly what Nolan
said when pitching the film to Warner
Brothers. And anytime someone asked him
about the logic of the movie, and it
truly is the best advice when watching
this movie, when you go into it trying
to understand it, it breaks your brain.
But when you let it take you away as
just a sensory experience, it kind of
works. What Nolan doesn't account for,
of course, is that nearly all of the
payoffs in this movie work best if you
have some of that math running in your
head. Otherwise, when things happen, you
just kind of think, "What the [__] did I
just see?" Barbara shows the protagonist
rows and rows of drawers of other
inverted objects. The behind the scenes
documentary reveals how the back end of
this corridor shot was a backdrop that
was just drawn by hand because they
wanted to make it look like it would go
on and on forever like infinity mirrors
to indicate that they just found
hundreds of thousands maybe millions of
pieces of inverted debris from this
future war. So we move on to Mumbai
where the protagonist cases the home of
Sanjay Singh the source of the unusual
bullet casing metal alloy. They shot
this at the Namm Shri Vardham Tower in
the upscale breach candy area of South
Mumbai. In the Bombay Yacht Club, we
meet Neil Robert Patinson. Ligernson
scores Neil's arrival with this
interesting buzz.
It seems you need an introduction to a
prominent Mumbai local on short notice.
I'm Neil. Yeah, that buzz just makes us
feel like this is a character that has
his own interesting relationship with
time that he's not letting on yet. Even
the way Neil stares at the protagonist
before saying, "I'm Neil." Robert Patson
just fits in this look of familiarity as
if Neil is just like temporarily at a
loss of words because he is looking in
the face of the younger version of the
old man who recruited him and trained
him, gave him everything he knows, but
he can't tell him that. Now, you'll
notice Neil is also probably supposed to
be slightly buzzed in this scene cuz
he's ordering at least his second vodka
tonic. So, we just kind of shrug off any
weirdness to him, like he's he's
sweating more, right? He's supposed to
be a little drunk. But he orders the
protagonist a diet coke. You never drink
on the job. You're well informed. Neil,
of course, knows his drink order because
they have worked together for years.
Well, I prefer soda water. No, you
don't. And having experience with
inversion is what inspires Neil on a way
to get into the high-rise. If bungee
jumping is the only way out of it, an
elastic cable would be the best way up
to it. Now, it's just kind of a normal
cable slingshot up to the balcony wound
back up on a coil. There's nothing
inverted about this hardware, but the
idea to enter this way came to Neil
because he's just used to thinking in
reverse. Priya rings the alarm, but Neil
is at the security station.
Don't let it get cold. Now, this line is
not in the script, but it is kind of a
007 style quip that might have been
adlipped by Patson. Another reference to
cold versus heat in this entropic war,
but it's not Sanjay thereafter, but
really his wife Priya. To say anything
about a client would violate the tenants
he lives by. Priya is also a member of
the tenant organization using this arms
dealer arrangement as a cover to get
closer to Russian billionaire Andre
Seder, one of the Seder Square words. We
learn the reason why the bullet casings
were made today but inverted at some
point in the future is that Priya sold
these bullets to him recently and
through some connections with the future
society, he was able to invert much of
his hardware. Priya says to get anywhere
near it, I would take a fresh face
protagonist. This is one of only three
scenes in the movie in which the moniker
of protagonist is actually spoken out
loud each of the times with Priya. You
are a protagonist. Did you think you
were the only one capable of saving the
world? We've both been working for me.
I'm the protagonist. So, it seems like
it was really Priya who gave him the
idea of using this as a code name. And
this being the protagonist's first
mission is very important. he wouldn't
have been able to infiltrate Sader's
ranks later in his career in the tenant
organization because at that point he
would be all too wellknown. He had to do
it when he was still just an initiate.
He didn't really fully understand how
involved the organization was. Also, I
guess you could say he had to do it as
an initiate because he had already done
it as an initiate. But, you know, you
get it or you don't. Uh, either way,
we're okay. Police arrive. We must have
had a plan for getting out.
Not one I love. I love how Neil just
whizzes past us in a blur in the shot
coming from the higher floor. But in a
way, Neil has been looping past us in
all kinds of ways through time this
whole film. Someone really needs to make
a cut of Tenant with all the background
inverted Neil and all the background
inverted old protagonists played by
Denzel Washington. Like you know you'd
watch that, you psycho. Onto London's
Reform Club. The Reform Club is actually
featured in two 007 films. Die another
day as the Blades Club and everyone's
favorite Bond movie, Quantum of Solace
as an Government Office. Jeremy Thebalt
plays the steward. He is a longtime
collaborator with Christopher Nolan. He
appeared in his student shorts Larseny
and Doodlebug and then Nolan's earlier
features following and Batman Begins. I
love how saucy the protagonist is with
him here. Started without you. Hope you
don't mind. I'll catch up.
Same for me, please. I'll send the I'll
just pass on the order. Actually,
there's more wonderful 007 wordplay
there. Like I'll catch up as in I'll
catch up on the meal, but also I will
catch up on the context of what the hell
this mission is. And also, you're eating
some fried chips there, so uh ketchup.
And not only is handling the steward
this way a power move by a black man in
a stuffy club, the protagonist also
doesn't want to be interrupted by
multiple unfamiliar faces during this
sensitive conversation. Michael Kite
plays Crosby, who informs the
protagonist about Seder and his origin
from one of the Soviet era secret
cities, cities that were built around
sensitive industries like nuclear towns
around the USSR that were kept off the
map. Seder's hometown Stalsk 12 was
never opened as a normal city later on
suggesting that it would have been some
other place like Pryyat, the town beside
Chernobyl, but the world has never heard
about this one, which is very spooky.
Crosby explains that on the day of the
Kiev siege, there was a detonation in
Stal 12 and from there Seder emerged.
He's literally talking about the Stalsk
12 battle that we will get to in the
third act of this film and the
detonation will have to be completed and
entered into the historical record for
the future society to think the
algorithm was buried there. Crosby
explains that Seder's wife, Catherine,
is an art dealer having an affair with a
forger named Areo. Of course, another
one of the tenant Seder Square words,
and Catherine sold one of Areo's
forgeries to Seder. The plan at this
point is for the protagonist to use what
he thinks is this scandalous affair to
blackmail Catherine into setting up a
meeting with Seder. But since it soon
after falls apart when we learn that
Seder was aware of the forgery and using
that crime to blackmail Catherine into
staying in a nightmare marriage with
him, really this whole plot point just
kind of amounts to a few things. One,
Nolan finding an excuse to put Michael
Kane in the movie and Kane delivering
half of this exposition through a
mouthful of chips and still sounding
dignified. And two, the protagonist
proving to Crosby that he can play the
part of a billionaire art collector by
successfully eyeballing a Goya in a
Herod's bag so that the protagonist can
get a royal credit card to up his
wardrobe, which actually will prove
essential because high tailored wardrobe
is essentially the billionaire's version
of a vest and a clipboard. But because
Nolan feels like he has to go through
every step of the motions of a 007 movie
exposition dump, he edits all this at a
breakneck pace so that it's really hard
for viewers not to stop thinking about
it and just feel it like he advises
because we feel like we're missing
critical information. So to us, the end
result is that it kind of sounds like
this guy's sketch. 2 days before the
detonation in Siberia, we intercepted a
phone call between Petro and a man
called Darien Burkar to start a weapons
company in Germany called Smurlesfer.
Darian Burkar, the scientist. I thought
he was dead. He is dead. Or rather, he
isn't. What does that mean? So, the
protagonist observes how Catherine only
gets a moment with her son every day on
his way out of school, while a nanny
hired by Seder looks like she's scared
that she's going to get yelled at or
something worse by Seder. Later on, the
ship's representative who greets the
protagonist is played by Tom Nolan,
Christopher Nolan's cousin and the son
of John Nolan. Both Jon and Tom have
appeared in several of Christopher
Nolan's films. Elizabeth Dicki plays
Sad's wife, Catherine, who inspects the
Goya forgery with a hint of familiarity
at seeing her ex-lovers work. What's it
worth? Let's not get ahead of ourselves.
Lots of work to do before any kind of
valuation,
provenence, microscopic examination,
X-rays. Ah, there's some fun double
meaning here because Cat in the next
scene tells the protagonist that because
the art authentication process takes so
long with all these steps that she just
mentioned, that's what allowed her to
get close to Tomaso. So, by telling
protagonists, "Let's not get ahead of
ourselves," she's admitting, "Wo there,
handsome. I'm not about to get another
ex-lover's legs broken and tongue cut
out, or you know, other things cut off
and stuffed into places." At dinner, Cat
confesses that Seder found out about the
forgery in the affair and uses that to
control her life, forcing a vacation to
Vietnam 2 weeks prior. I sat on that
bloody boat watching the sunsets,
imitating some earlier time in our
lives. Later, we will see that there was
a second cat on this boat, imitating an
earlier time, and it will be a literally
bloody boat. That mystery woman that Cat
saw diving off the yacht is herself. So,
when she later says that she longs to
just dive off that boat and gain
freedom, she's setting up her own future
to literally be that woman.
So yes, technically according to this
movie's logic, Seder died on that boat
in Vietnam 2 weeks before all this after
the seder we're about to meet inverts
back through time to the day of that
stall 12 detonation. But as Neil will
later say, that's not an excuse to do
nothing because Seder can only get to
that destined death on the boat in
Vietnam if protagonist and Cat and Neil
all work together in the events that lie
ahead. Sader's men, led by Volkov,
removed Cat and confront the
protagonist. Here we see why a fine
tailored suit was so important because
it really tricked these goons into
lowering their guard, assuming the
protagonist was just some new money art
lover so that he can surprise them by
being a brutal fighter and a resourceful
one at that. Like at one point, he uses
this cheese grater to scrape the goon's
hand just to distract them with a bit of
pain before some heavier hits. Cat sees
Max the next day and it says we're going
to Pompei and see lava. This is the
upcoming trip to the Amafi coast and
it's another glimpse at Nolan's homework
into the archaeological origins of the
Seder Square. Cat tells protagonists
that she suspects Seder kept the other
Goya in his vault at an Oslo freeport, a
section of the airport, that Seder's
construction company, Roas, the fifth
and final Seder Square magic word of
this movie, builds for wealthy clients
to store the valuables without having to
pay import tax. Neil cases the vaults as
the clerk explains that they base the
structure on the vaults of the Pentagon.
And we learn that each of these vaults
is a separate structure within the
others, which they realize is designed
to house an innermost chamber that's the
heart of one of Nolan's Inception mazes.
It's a vault within a vault within a
vault within a vault within a vault,
five layers deep. And Inception was five
dream layers deep. We also see here why
Crosby told the protagonist that Brooks
Brothers wouldn't cut it. He and Neil
have to sport the finest Taylor Zeus to
be able to even initially case this ros
vault structure to understand its
layout, its gaps, and the door code that
the guide has to punch in. Yet Neil
nearly gives away his tail when the guy
has to say, "Uh, duh. These billionaires
have their own private terminal." Part
of what keeps this spycraft story so
compartmentalized from the normal
authorities and the outside forces in
the media is that it's just really,
really hard for normal people to
successfully masquerade as being
extremely wealthy because rich snobs are
always able to sniff out when there's an
upper middle class poser among them. I
hear you've made an enormous faux paw.
She's brought a ludicrously capacious
bag. What? What's even in there? Huh?
Flat shoes for the subway. Another bit
of interesting commentary here is how
Roas largely exists for billionaires to
permanently store their art collections
in a secure vault at an airport without
having to pay import taxes, not to
display them and enjoy them in their
homes, just to own them so they can
appreciate in value and collect dust and
really so that their rivals cannot get
them. And it tells us how the tenant
organization will have to think in terms
of that ungratifying zero sum game in
order to succeed. Like the goal is to
collect these very important artifacts,
not to use them, but really just to bury
them so they collect dust and no one
else can ever use them. Neil also clocks
in the private terminal house. Some
crates are destined for Oslo, some for
Talon, which tells him that Seder both
has something of interest in this vault
and in Talon, as we will later see. Both
are locations of turnstyles. Neil's
suggested way in since this is an
airport that has its own
governmentbacked security, is to just
crash a big old plane into the private
terminal. You want to crash a plane, but
not from the air. So dramatic. This is
Nolan kind of poking fun at two of his
past films. The Dark Knight Rises, which
opens with Nolan dramatically crashing a
plane from the air, which was a true
practical stunt and Inception, when
Seaitto's proposal to bypass the first
step of Fisher security is to just buy
the whole freaking airline. Himesh Patel
joins the cast as Mahir, Neil's
operative, who will help them commandeer
this Norse freight jet along with his
partner Rohan. Nolan and his team
actually bought and used a real Boeing
747 for this crash sequence that they
shot in Victorville, California. Somehow
that was cheaper than using miniatures.
And Nolan refused to use CGI for any of
this. And yeah, while a giant practical
jet crashing into a practical hanger is
an impressive sequence to behold,
especially the way it drags these parked
cars along the way, I really see it as
like the Trinity test sequence of this
movie. It's a spectacle that's really
big in Nolan's mind, but to the viewer,
it's a bit underwhelming. But the reason
Nolan did it this way is that he needed
a practical and a pretty fun solution to
their dilemma. They need this to look
like just a dumb accident so that
authorities and the media don't freak
out over what would definitely look like
a terrorist attack. Yet, it also needs
to be big and sudden enough to trigger a
fire so that Neil and the protagonist
inside can exploit the lockdown of the
vault layers. and Mahir and Rohan dumped
the gold bars that this Norse freight
was delivering to create the most chaos
possible on the tarmac because
authorities would be so distracted
keeping workers and each other from
snatching any of that loose gold like
Rohan grabbed one. By the way, we later
learn each of these gold plates is
upwards of $300,000. So, Rohan made off
pretty good on this job. The protagonist
and Neil get past the outermost layers.
Neil senses that there's another layer
of something already going on here,
though. Is someone new with us? That
someone we will later see in the second
half of this movie is his future self
and an incapacitated cat who on the
other sides of the protagonist looping
back through here inverted turn styling
and then reverting to normal will also
use this temporal pinser to get Cat
reverted so that she can heal from an
inverted wound. So Neil in this moment
is sensing his future inverted self
sneaking around these halls with him.
They arrive at the innermost vault room
with two doors. The protagonist enters
on the left, the blue side. Neil enters
on the right, the red side, and they
find bullet holes in the glass in
between, still smoking. And the
protagonist realizes that they are
seeing the aftermath of something that
hasn't happened yet. And he knows this
because he already saw the already
formed bullet holes on the floor of the
Kiev Opera House. And the turnstyle
cylinders on both sides open. And hello,
on Neil's side, a forward moving mask
figure runs past him. And on the
protagonist side, an inverted mask
figure springs backward out at him. Of
course, we now know this is a future
inverted the protagonist who had run in
through the blue side of the room, went
through the turn style, reverted to
normal, and continued running past Neil
on the other side. But Nolan doesn't
tell us what we're seeing yet. He wants
us to be confused. He just chooses to
show us all this while having no idea
what we are seeing yet. We just think
we're seeing two men coming out of a big
old mystery box and one of them doing
impossible sorcery while fighting our
hero. And we're just kind of like, huh?
But in Nolan's mind, I'm sure he's like,
I'm demonstrating how
compartmentalization is how the tenant
organization is fighting this war. It's
a war against the unknown. And I'm sure
that's what we all thought the first
time we saw this. But again, with the
blue side being the inverted side, we're
also staying consistent with the color
coding. Blue for inverted, red for
normal progression. Now, when
constructing the turn style set, Nolan
and his team conceived it as two
rotating cylinders to indicate that you
must be in motion to cross from one side
to the other. And by constructing them
this way, it would guarantee a sealed
airpressurized chamber during that
transition because to invert something,
you must also invert the entropy of its
oxygen molecules. When choreographing
this fight and all action between normal
and inverted things, Christopher Nolan
established a rule where they could not
use any reverse photography camera
trickery to portray any characters or
vehicles moving in reverse. It all had
to be done practically and he had to
show his work. They had to do the
hardest version of it. And since in this
moment we are seeing several of the
protagonists at different points of time
coccupying the same space, John David
Washington had to shoot the scene again
and again ultimately from four different
vantage points by the end of the film.
So let's break those down in this
moment. One, the point of view of the
normal protagonist the first time he
enters this room and reacts defensively
to the inverted combat of this mystery
opponent. Two, the point of view of that
mystery opponent in this first version
of the scene doing these inverted combat
moves. John David Washington had to do
all that. And then three, later in the
film, when we loop back to this moment,
John David Washington then had to
perform all that same choreography in
the normal progressive sequence. Now
that we were within his inverted point
of view with him and for now that we had
looped back to the vault, John David
Washington also had to play his original
suited self, but with all of those
stunts in reverse. 1 2 3 4. Now, the
attention to detail is just so great
here, and it comes so fast, we don't
even notice it. Like when the normal
masked, the protagonist comes back
through the turn style on Neil's side,
he looks back at us through the glass at
his two past selves because he knows
inverted bullets are about to fly from
the wall on the other side back through
the glass into the gun he would have
just fired from his perspective. And
here in this initial fight, before these
three inverted shots return into the
gun, there is a moment where normal the
protagonist dislodges a gun from the
inverted protagonist hand. And the only
reason he could do that is because the
inverted protagonist hesitates a moment
as he looks back to the right to make
sure his future self, his self a few
seconds into the future from him now on
Neil's side is out of the way of those
shots. You see these glances look more
punctuated and intentional later on in
the movie on the other side of the
fight, but they do exist in this version
of it. I know, I know it's a lot to take
in and it's really just impossible to
comprehend any of this on the first
viewing, but re-watching these scenes
multiple times, you can see how all the
choreography was at least perfectly
constructed for us to find on our fifth
or sixth viewing of it. So, the
protagonist fights his inverted self in
the outer hall and quickly realizes he's
fighting someone who already knows his
moves. There is an amazing inverted flip
that John David Washington and a
stuntman had to learn how to do
practically by just shifting around on
each other's weight. Meanwhile, Neil
catches up to the forward running
protagonist. And we realize later that
the only reason he was able to catch up
to him is because that future
protagonist is exhausted after all of
this, especially the tussle that he had
just had to go through with his past
self, the tussle that we are currently
watching in this scene. Neil unmasks the
guy and then decides to let him go. And
later on, we'll see that's because he
realizes it's a future version of the
protagonist. And he knows in that moment
that he just has to trust the process
and make sure the protagonist trusts
whatever this process is, too. He has to
express faith in the mechanics of the
universe. And this all ends with this
crazy moment of the inverted protagonist
getting sucked out of the damaged
rolling door. Later, we will see that he
used the blast from the jet engine
outside to blow himself in through this
breach. And that's how we got into all
of this. And when we cut to the jet
engine outside, we actually see two
firefighters standing to get away from
it. And an ambulance pulls up. This, we
will later see, is the future
protagonist that Neil had just let go.
now park in the ambulance for future
Neil an injured cat to pick them up
after they could revert through the turn
style. Now in the scene when the
protagonist asks Neil what happened to
that other guy, Neil just says that he
took care of him, which is kind of his
way of saying, "Uh, future you would be
up to something else on this night and I
just took care of you by letting you
go." As they recover after this, Neil
says, "Well, I've seen too much. I'm
still alive, which must mean you've
decided to trust me. Or maybe I lost my
edge. Your edge is still intact." I
think Neil might just be sitting here
after seeing two U's last night. I'm
clearly dealing with a tenant operative
who knows way more than I do and thanks
for keeping me alive for whatever I can
do to help next boss. And he quips that
his edge is still intact because Neil
had just ensured that wherever the
future of the protagonist was headed,
he's still on that mission. The
protagonist explains to Neil that they
are dealing with a cold war of a
temporal nature with objects and bodies
with reversed entropy. You mean reverse
chronology like Fman and Wheeler's
notion of a posetron as an electron
moving backwards in time. We're seeing
Nolan already flirting with the
historical figures he will be using for
his future Oppenheimer script. Feainman
and Wheeler referred to Richard Feainman
played by Jack Quaid in Oppenheimer and
theoretical physicist John Wheeler's
1940 one electron universe postulate in
which Wheeler theorized that the reason
all electrons have the exact same charge
and exact same mass is that they all
could actually be one electron
zigzagging back and forth through time.
I know. Now, the protagonist responds to
this by saying sarcastically, "Yeah,
that's exactly what I meant." Because he
doesn't have the education that Neil
has. But as far as Neil knows, the
protagonist could be speaking some truth
here. Because both the protagonist and
Neil will spend the rest of their lives
as singular entities, zigzagging back
and forth through time, giving the
illusion that there are multiples of
them, but there are only ever one
person. Actually, it was scripted lines
like these in Tennet that likely
inspired Robert Patson to gift
Christopher Nolan with a book of J.
Robert Oppenheimer's speeches after
wrapping on this film that led to Nolan
reading American Prometheus and writing
the Oppenheimer screenplay. The
protagonist warns Neil to continue
pretending this mission is all about
plutonium or well when we're done
they'll kill you. Why don't you have to
do that anyway? I'd rather be my
decision. So would I? I think this
foreshadows Neil's decision at the end
of the film. He knows they'll have to
die to keep tenant a secret so why not
do it on his own terms. Back to Mumbai.
Priya shows a newspaper about the Oslo
incident where the date shows the events
of this movie as taking place in 2019.
There's also an insurance ad for all
generations. Secure your family's future
now. Now, Christopher Nolan isn't known
for Easter eggs in his films, but he
does love details, and this seems like a
propmaster detail added to reflect this
movie being a time war between the
future and the present. In this scene,
the protagonist refers to the agents and
the turn style as antagonists, and Priya
says that they were the same person. The
twist, of course, being the protagonist
and the antagonists are all the same
person. Priya assigns a protagonist to
help Seder steal what she says is the
same package from Kievs. Still calling
it plutonium 241 even though she knows
it's a piece of the inversion algorithm
because she still doesn't fully trust
the protagonist to know what that
artifact actually is. And maybe because
she knows he's about to talk to Seder
and wants him to still refer to it as
241 and not slip up because if he
slipped up, Seder would never trust him
to work with him. Now, the edit cuts a
scene short from the extra exposition
that you can read in the screenplay for
this film on page 53. We are being
attacked by the future
and Sat's helping. They have to find out
how. I suppose Christopher Nolan felt
the script line of theirs is running
out, so they're coming after ours might
have just been a bit confusing because
it's not that the future scientists are
trying to steal the time of the present,
but rather they're just trying to solve
whatever global crisis they are in in
the future by just reverting the flow of
time for the entire world. I'll get to
what the future scientists are actually
trying to do later in this video. But I
think the reason Christopher Nolan said
tenant works better if you don't think
about it is partly because if you do try
to think about what these future
scientists are trying to do, there's
really no way it makes that much sense.
But again, as I'll explain later, it's
not like a master plan in the future.
It's a plan born out of desperation.
Onto the Amalfi Coast, the protagonist
asks Cat to introduce him to Seder as a
State Department employee implied to be
having an affair with her, and she shows
him Seder's mega yacht. Two helicopters,
missile defenses. Afraid of pirates.
Wondre lives playing one government off
the other. Day they turn. That's his
refuge. You heard that right. A yacht
with two helicopter pads and missile
defenses. Sader is expecting warships
and fighters to try to bomb him. Andre
Seder is played by the great Sir Kenneth
Brana. And the way he first appears in
frame is pretty creepy. Max,
who's the American?
Yeah. Nolan frames the shot just so that
we get a glimpse of the empty terrace
door outside, but there is just the
slightest edge of Sader's arm in the
frame to let us know that he was there.
Yet, when he does appear in the doorway,
it's as if he just kind of popped up
from out of nowhere. Seder as a threat
in this world is just someone who
emerged in history pretty much from
obscurity. Like, the future scientist
selected him because he was a doomed
nobody. The protagonist meets Seder, who
promptly asks if he slept with his wife
yet. Uh, no,
not yet.
He's still saying yet like I'm going to
get there, sir. Seder threatens to cut
his throat and stuff his balls in. But
the protagonist asks, "Do you like
opera?" This stop Seder because
obviously he's referring to the artifact
Sader was trying to acquire from the KV
opera house. But I also like how opera
works as kind of a code word the same
way tenant does in this casual
conversation as both terms are again
part of the Seder Square. Seder asks if
he sails. You sail? I've messed around
on boats. Be on the dock of Date ready
to do more than mess around. Seder sets
up a date sailing and while Seder and
Cat argue about Max's schooling, Seder
has Cat served a Reuben's sketch. This
is based on Peter Paul Rubin's 1628
studies of women. This is the other aro
forgery that Cat worried about that
Seder ordered moved from the vault,
presumably the moment his men spotted
the protagonist visiting her at
Shipley's in London. But Seder also says
he's always had instincts about the
future. So maybe after that Oslo
incident, he used the turn style to loop
back to before the jet crashed into the
terminal to extract that sketch from the
ROS vault so that he could still hold it
over her. The protagonist and stator
discussed the opera siege and how in
2008 a remote Russian missile station
was overwhelmed and 3/4 of a kilo of
plutonium 241 went missing from a
warhead until it supposedly resurfaced
at the opera house. Now why is this
scene set on a high-speed sailing yacht?
Well, remember Christopher Nolan is
making his version of a 007 film. And
those movies always have James Bond
joining the villain on some excessive
extravagant pissing contest. But this
also sets up Cat to try to murder Seder
and the protagonist to save him,
demonstrating trust between the two men.
Seder tells the protagonist about his
teenage youth digging up plutonium in
the rebel of his home city, Stal 12,
when the pot of a warhead exploded,
scattering other warheads. Essentially,
Seder was that type of worker depicted
in HBO's Chernobyl series, working a
thankless, lifeshortening job digging up
radioactive material and some other
secret Soviet nuclear city after an
accident the outside world was never
told about. Young Seder is played by
Adam Craropper, who is a shocking
spinning image of a young Kenneth Brana.
Young Seder finds a buried capsule
containing a document with his name on
it. You animist Australis on Reddit
translated this document to determine it
is a template of a business license from
the Russian Federal Taxation Service
with the word for license and cerillic
replaced by the English letters of the
name Andre Seder. The future scientists
who sent this to Seder registered a
limited liability company named GSL
audit. So this license plus the bars of
gold are how the future scientist set up
Seder with a rich shell company to build
his empire in the new Russia after the
collapse of the Soviet Union. The
protagonist demands that Sader not harm
Cat. And as Sader goes to his bedroom,
we see him taking off his belt. Sader in
this movie always has a belt on. Even
when Cat eventually kills him, he's
wearing a belt when his body slashes off
the deck. And we see in the next scene,
it's part of his abuse routine. He even
plugs his diamond cuff links into the
holes, which just feels like part of his
sadistic ritual that he does to torment
the women in his life. The protagonist
sees Seder receiving another future
capsule with gold bars, inverted gold
bars that fly back up into his hand, and
Seder counts them one by one to realize
that one of his attendants had pocketed
one. The protagonist sees Seder beating
that guy to death with the bar, and
Volkov drags him in front of Seder,
where he says that he's part of the CIA,
saying that the CIA provides twothirds
of the market for file material. Anyway,
they're usually buying, not selling, but
we do live in a twilight world. Is that
Whitman pretty? Ah, Seder is proving
that he knows the CIA passphrase that
the protagonist exchange with the asset
in Kiev. But the phrase certainly means
something different to Seder, who
literally wants to reverse the sunset in
the sunrise. Seder pays the protagonist
upfront with that same bloody gold bar,
and the protagonist fumbles it, but on
purpose so that he can scoop up some of
the soil that the capsule was buried in,
which Neil later tests to show that it
was from some radioactive spot in either
Northern Europe or Asia. We learn that
Seder does these dead drops with a
future scientist burying an empty time
capsule in a specific place no one would
dig up for centuries and then transmits
a location. Now, we're never shown how
exactly Seder transmits that data to the
future, but presumably it's some
dropbox, either a digital or a physical
one that is stored in a specific place
as just a kind of way for future
scientists to receive any of Sader's
messages. In Talin, Estonia, Neil and
the protagonist plan the heist for the
cargo Seder once stolen from a
reinforced truck using heavy big rigs to
box it in and a firetruck with a ladder
to crane over it and a deceptively fast
BMW getaway car. The protagonist says
all of this has to be done verbally with
nothing in writing, either digitally or
on paper, already anticipating a future
version of Seder might try to research
the steps of whatever their plan was to
ambush them. But the protagonist doesn't
yet realize that Cedar has multiple turn
styles, some large enough to fit an
entire vehicle through, so he doesn't
factor that into his plan. So, we go
into this Talon Freeway sequence
assuming that we're just going to be
watching a high-speed heist, similar to
Nolan's work in the Dark Knight when the
Joker chased down a police prisoner
convoy in his own truck. We don't really
understand until halfway through the
sequence that we're only seeing one half
of a temporal pinser ambush by Seder and
the future protagonist attempt to stop
him from doing that. Indeed, Nolan
structured this whole movie just to be
one half of the full story of Neil and
the protagonist friendship that we had
to mentally extrapolate beyond the
runtime of the film to understand. But
this is Nolan's way of just kind of like
setting the rules of the movie and just
hoping that we can keep up and apply
those rules to anything that might exist
beyond the movie. However, he does try
to help us out with a few clues. Like as
Seder threatens Cat again, he tells
Bolov to tell him everything that
happens in the street heist as it
happens so that he'll know the exact
sequence of the cargo's movements when
he is inverted. And that's why a little
bit later, right after they get the
cargo and unjam the radio frequencies,
Neil intercepts their radio messages and
he hears it as inverted Russian. That's
them having that conversation. Also, Cat
early on sees that the driver on the
other side of the Freeport structure
fence has a breathing mask on, meaning
that this guy has already been inverted
standing by. And so, we know from that
at this moment that Seder is planning on
inverting back through what we're about
to see. And then, of course, the amazing
detail of the side view mirror on the
BMW. The first time we see this mirror,
before the BMW even approaches the
truck, it's already damaged. And every
successive time we see it, it stays
damaged until the moment Seder's
inverted SUV clips it, fixing it from
our normal perspective. But the real
detail that I love about this is before
the first time we see that side view
mirror, Nolan has strategically framed
it behind John David Washington's head
in all shots inside the BMW. Like Nolan
never wants us to see the status of the
mirror in the earlier minutes of the
mission because logically this mirror
would be broken from the moment the
protagonist got in the car. But that's
just a bit too confusing to think about.
So Nolan just kind of covers it for the
first minute of the sequence. So the
protagonist recovers the cargo and
realizes that it's not 241, but
something weird. And we will learn this
is a piece of the algorithm. But before
they even understand what it is, they
see Seder's SUV getting ahead of them on
the freeway, driving in reverse from
their point of view. But in reality, and
you actually see this later if you
actually reverse the footage and do it
slowly from the inverted SUV's
perspective, they sped past the BMW clip
the mirror after the force exchange that
normal Neil and Normal, the protagonist,
are about to drive into. And again,
Nolan and his team shot these inverted
driving sequences practically with
high-speed reversing alongside
high-speed forward driving. And many of
these shots are actually background
extra cars reversing at a consistent
slower normal flow of traffic speed
while the villain SUV steers
aggressively through that flow. And then
they reverse all of that footage to make
it look like a one SUV is weaving
violently but elegantly inverted through
the normal traffic. This inverted SUV
catches up to them and it is Seder in a
breathing mask, meaning he's inverted,
holding a gun to Cat, counting down to
three, which means that Seder from his
perspective is counting up to three,
knowing what this threat will look like
reversed from the other side. But right
after forward moving protagonist sees
this, an overturned silver ahead of them
on the road flips back on its wheels and
seems to be inverted itself. Now, this
silver Saab, we later learn, contains
the inverted protagonist trying to chase
Seder down. But from the inverted
sader's perspective, he saw inverted
protagonist Silver Saab spin out and
flip and then thought, "Okay, it's just
me and the confused past one and learned
a valuable piece of information from
seeing that that we'll come back to
later." The protagonist does the handoff
with the orange suitcase. And a lot
happens here. And it only becomes
slightly clearer on the inverted side
later. And since this whole sequence
really hinges on what exactly happens in
these few seconds, we really need to
break it down both ways.
Inverted Sader in the Audi is trying to
get the orange suitcase with the
algorithm piece inside of it from the
forward moving protagonist over in the
black BMW with forward moving Neil. The
inverted protagonist, Silver Saab, was
wrecked a moment ago, but has now
reverse flipped and he's now driving
inverted in the Saab between the forward
moving protagonist in the forward moving
BMW and inverted Sader in the inverted
Audi with its inverted driver. The
normal protagonist tosses the orange
suitcase bouncing off the hood of the
Saab into Seder's hands. And inverted
Seder takes that orange case through the
Audi into another car, a Mercedes that
is moving forward with a forward moving
driver and departs, leaving Cat to die
in the speeding Audi. So that the
forward moving protagonist has to save
her and not go after Seder in this
moment. So in this shuffle, we have the
BMW, a Saab, an Audi, and a Mercedes.
four different luxury car makers, which
I think Christopher Nolan wrote into the
script because he loves cars, and to
help the crew reading the script and the
assistant directors keep track of it all
because it's very complicated to
communicate on set which car is doing
what. Now, it also would have helped if
he made them all different colors as
well instead of neutral colors, but you
know, this is the world of Spycraft and
they're not trying to be that showy.
Keeping everything gray also helps train
our eye on the orange suitcase. But
right away, the first time we see the
scene, if you're watching closely, you
know something's up because when the
forward moving protagonist tosses the
orange suitcase, he keeps the algorithm
piece in his hand. You see that the
first time it's a classic switcheroo,
and I think he's counting on Seder being
distracted by the flash of orange coming
at him that he wouldn't see a chunk of
silver metal behind it. So, inverted
Seder after this has an empty orange
suitcase. How does he retrieve the
algorithm piece later? Seder's ultimate
retrieval of the algorithm piece from
this freeway is not shown on screen. But
later when the inverted protagonist is
driving back down this freeway in the
Saab, when we return to this handoff,
inverted protagonist is surprised to see
the algorithm piece already in the Saab
wedged between the seat and the door. It
wiggles out and hops back into forward
moving protagonist hand. So from that
we're meant to understand that the
protagonist tossed the algorithm piece
into the open window of this Saab and
that piece stayed there from the moment
inverted protagonist got into it back at
the free port and that's where it would
have stayed but presumably forward
moving protagonist handoff switch didn't
fool inverted seder because from that
moment later on he sees where the
forward moving protagonist tossed the
algorithm piece and he knew that Saab
would invert back to the free port lot
where he would have had to invert so
later on inverted Sader could revert.
too forward moving and go back there and
retrieve it from the car. Now, we will
kind of see how this all looks from the
inverted protagonist perspective later,
but the free port turnstyle chamber
scene after this concerns where exactly
protagonist hid the algorithm piece. So,
to understand what's going on in that
conversation, I think it helps to know
this going in. Cat knows that the
protagonist will have to get into her
car, so she has to reach her leg into
the driver's seat to hit the child lock.
Honestly, I think Christopher Nolan
casting Elizabeth Dbiki in addition to
Dickiy's talent. It's also because Dicki
is 6'2 with long legs and her pulling
this off is somewhat plausible. After
some tense moments, the protagonist gets
into the Audi and stops it. But
immediately they're ambushed by the
forward moving half of Seder's team.
I'm calling the cavalry. What cavalry?
Neil is referring to Iive's team, the
military unit that's part of the tenant
organization that Neil has already been
working with. This devolving into a
shootout with Iive's cavalry soon
interfering is partly why Seder is in
such a rush with the protagonist in Cat
in the Chamber later. Ahead of him from
his vantage point will be an even
messier shootout where he will have only
a few seconds to search one car before
all these vehicles go back from this
roadblock to where they started from.
Some of Sader's guys grab the
protagonist and take him to the Talon
Freeport. A few others grab Cat from the
back seat. Through this fence, the
protagonist sees Cat being pulled by
inverted seder. This is the seder with
the respirator mask that we saw on the
freeway before. But Cat is not inverted.
We don't really see it, but the guys who
grabbed Cat from the back seat handed
her off to inverted seder as they
rendevued at this Talon Freeport lot as
inverted Sader was at his exit point
from the blue side of the turn style.
It's kind of hard to see, but since
Debecky and Brena had to move like this
practically, they both walk in these
awkward movements so that Brana kind of
looks like he's doing the reverse of
what a normal forward lunge would look
like, if that makes sense. While Dicki
and her heels kind of tangoes forward,
but since she's being pulled by inverted
sader force, she also has to kind of
look like she's being the reverse of
pushed instead of pulled. Again, no one
would notice this from behind the fence
other than, "Huh, that kind of looks
weird." But Christopher Nolan is like,
"No, I think it really needs to be
accurate." We see a similar awkward
tango inside from the protagonist point
of view on the red side of the turn
style as inverted Seder reverses and Cat
moves forward as if she's the opposite
of being pushed. Seder straps the
respirator mask on her because now the
air on the blue side of the room is
inverted and Cat right now is not.
Compared to the Oslo airport turn style,
this one in Talon is larger, big enough
for large groups of people and vehicles
to go through. We actually see one car
covered in the background on the red
side. This explains how inverted Seder's
car a few minutes ago could itself get
inverted. Because the protagonist at
this point has been in a room like this
before where bullet holes were already
in the glass separating the sides, he
now sees a bloody bullet embedded in the
glass and does some mental math to know
it must come from somewhere and it must
be someone's blood. Inverted Sader
interrogates the protagonist on where he
left the algorithm piece. But the
protagonist hears his questions reverted
audio first before we see Inverted
Sader's lips move to ask it. You left it
in the car, not the fire truck, right?
Yeah, just now.
Told you that. Inverted Sader from his
point of view is about to head back out
into an inverted world. And based on the
radio messages he's been getting from
the inverted half of his team in the
temporal pinser, there are really two
options of places to look. He thinks the
BMW glove box that the protagonist and
Neil were in or the fire truck that they
used to steal the case. Inverted Seder
doesn't yet know that there really is
third option, the Saab. In the making of
documentary, you can see how Kenneth
Brana actually wrote out each of his
lines in the scene in a Russian accent,
but with each of the phonetic syllables
in reverse for him to pronounce it. This
is true dedication. Like he wanted his
lip movements to be accurately visibly
in reverse of what Seder would be saying
through the speaker. Inverted Seder
fires an inverted bullet through cat's
side and the protagonist tells him that
he left it in the glove box of the BMW.
Now at this point, forward moving Seder
comes in on the red side and asks,
"Where did you leave it?
Car which one?" From redside Seder's
perspective, this is the beginning of
the interrogation. An interrogation that
will continue on the other side, the
blue side of the turn style. Seder is
forced to hurry into those turnstyle
doors before killing the protagonist
because I's cavalry arrives and chases
him. But at this point, we already know
Seder has successfully inverted into the
past unencumbered. Now we see the
interrogation from his inverted point of
view on the blue side. I love the detail
that since Cat in this inverted room is
not inverted, when her reversed self
exhales through the mask, her hair kind
of moves according to the inverted
movement. Kind of like exhaled CO2 going
back into her lungs and dragging her
hair toward her face. Inverted Seder
shoots the bullet through Cat, causing
her to no longer be wounded. Seder now
takes this hostage Cat with him outside
because he knows it's part of his
temporal pinser plan to use her on the
freeway. Aaron Taylor Johnson joins the
film now as Ives giving us some
muchneeded exposition for what the is
going on by defining a temporal pinser
movement. Pinser movement, but not in
space in time. Half his team moves
forward through the event. He monitors
them and then attacks at the end moving
backwards knowing everything. Since
we're now dealing with the military arm
of the tenant organization, all of their
explanations of the temporal technology
have moved away from the lofty academic
and philosophical concepts to practical
soldier jargon. Because these are troops
who have moved back and forth through
turn styles for who knows how long, and
their priority is how to safely move
through an inverted world when it comes
to gravity, inertia, friction, air flow,
heat, etc. The protagonist tells Neil
and Ives that he lied to Seder about
where he stashed the algorithm piece and
he decides to take injured cat back
through the turn style to stabilize the
radiation from the inverted bullet. Ives
reminds us that they can't spend the
weeks it'll take to invertedly heal here
because they only took control of this
facility minutes ago. So they got to get
out of there. We find another machine a
week ago where now looking back at this
movie you might ask, wait, doesn't I
army have that big old boat with a
revolving door to invert or revert
people whenever they want? Yes. Yes,
they do. In a moment after this, Ives
reveals he does know all about the Oslo
turnstyle. This is not a plot hole
because Tennant is a super
compartmentalized organization, and Ives
doesn't yet know if he can trust this
American with their most sensitive piece
of machinery or tell him where other
turnstyles might be. Just a second ago,
these parties were afraid to say out
loud to each other that the artifact
they're chasing isn't just plutonium
241. Ives calls the glass separating the
halves of the room a proving window as
it's the window you look through to
prove your inverted self is approaching
the turnstyle door on the other side to
let you know it's your destiny to go
through on your side. I also like the
double meaning on the word proving
because it also recalls a proving drawer
in baking a drawer that can be heated to
a temperature warmer than the room
temperature but cooler than an oven
would be used to help activate yeast and
let dough rise. So, in a sense, you're
also looking into this proving window to
see a transfer of thermal energy and
allow the gluten threads of your fate to
come together. I also love the little
deterministic logic fart Ives brings up
here. If you don't see yourself in the
proving window, do not enter the
machine. Why not? If you don't see
yourself reverse exiting the machine,
then you ain't getting there. Ha. So
basically, if you try to will your fate
by entering the machine without seeing
your inverted self will meet you at that
midpoint, then you'll just be stuck in
the machine for eternity and become kind
of an infinite Schrodinger's cat
flipping in and out of a quantum
reality. For Ives, seeing their inverted
forms approaching on the blue side tells
him, "Well, I guess I'm baited to take
this cowboy on the other side." And they
transfer. Now on the other side, the
protagonist reveals he's going to go
back out into the world for the artifact
and for Cat. He asks Neil what would
happen if Sader makes good on his
promise to kill Cat in the past. And
Neil says it's impossible to know that.
It's unknowable, but what do you
believe? What's happens happened? This
phrase, what's happened happened, is a
recurring way of explaining time travel
logic in certain types of time travel
stories. In my eight types of time
travel stories thesis, I call this type
four. This always happened. Which means
that future acts of time travel have
already had their impact on the life the
characters have lived. What's happened
happened is a way for characters to say
it's too late to change the past. This
is not back to the future. This isn't
about changing history. It's about
revisiting history to see what your time
traveling self's role always was in that
history. Another version of this phrase
actually came from Dr. Daniel Faraday to
explain time travel logic and lost
season 5 episode 11. And whatever
happened happened was actually the title
of that episode. It's like a straight.
All right. We can move forward on that
street. We can move in reverse. We
cannot ever create a new street if we
try to do anything different. We will
fail every time. Whatever happened
happened. Ives calls the protagonist
upcoming impulsive act cowboy [__]
because the protagonist is headed out to
save a woman they don't think they need.
Of course, they will need her. She is
the one who in the end kills Seder
without setting off the dead man switch.
We could look at this cowboy [__] as the
origin moment for the man who will one
day lead the tenant organization because
he was right about saving cat and how
important she would be to stop Seder and
in a sense paved his path in the
organization. Like this cowboy didn't
hesitate to go inverted with minimal
training and that must have ultimately
impressed this whole army into thinking
we need dudes like this. Now the female
soldier who briefs him is named Wheeler.
The name Wheeler might be another
reference to the Manhattan project. John
Archbold Wheeler was the Princeton
professor who was part of the Chicago
metallergical lab and designed nuclear
reactors. Wheeler drops a bunch of
inverted physics tips that all come so
fast it's kind of hard to take them in.
When you run, the wind would be at your
back. You encounter fire, ice, or form
on your close. I guess the idea being
when we run normally, air hits our face
to feel like wind. So in the rest of the
non-inverted world, it would look like
that person is running in reverse. So
the wind would be at their back. To help
picture this, let's look at the
protagonist's initial movement in the
lot outside, but let's reverse the
footage ourselves. To the rest of the
world, this is how inverted protagonist
would look, inverting backward toward
the door, so the wind would therefore be
at his back. Fire turning into ice is
how the protagonist survives the car
explosion later. The protagonist plans
to use the transponder on the orange
case to track where the inverted seder
would have tossed it, making it the ball
for him to follow into the handoff on
the freeway. The protagonist ventures
out into the world as an inverted
individual. And this opening moment does
a really cool job using atmospheric
details to establish simple visual and
auditory cues of things being reversed
from his point of view like the
seagull's flight and their squawks
and that passing boat in its horn.
But more important for what's to come,
little details showing the physical
effects of things that the inverted
protagonist is about to do before he
does them. For example, the puddle water
drips up to his boot before he steps
into it because reversed he would have
stepped into it and lifted his boot and
water would have dripped off of it. And
when he starts the car, the gravel flies
back under the tire because reversed the
tire would have skidded backwards to a
stop. And just a reminder, the Saab
parked here at the dock this whole time
is the last known resting place of the
algorithm piece wedged into the side of
the seat. Unbeknownst to the protagonist
in this moment, but ultimately waiting
for Seder to revert back again and come
pick it up. The protagonist initially
struggles to figure out the friction of
driving inverted as pedestrians go from
bewildered stairs to turning back
forward oblivious. Meanwhile, inverted
seder, the sader who just left the blue
side of the room, moves through the
shootout at the roadblock and looks into
the BMW glove box as the protagonist
told him, finding nothing. So, he
returns to his Mercedes, realizing it
must have been somewhere else. So, now
we go back to the protagonist in his
Saab, waiting. as Wheeler told him to
look to suddenly unstable objects. Sure
enough, that orange case starts
wiggling, meaning it's about to fly back
into something, and it is Seder's
Mercedes. Now, a reminder that this
Mercedes, the vehicle, is not inverted.
It is forward moving. It's being driven
by the forward moving half of Seder's
gang, someone without a mask. So, it
must have been some forward moving
henchmen driving it, who tossed the case
out when they realized it contained
nothing. But in that Mercedes, that
forward-ing driver had the orange
suitcase taken back from him from
inverted seder because inverted seder
knows the exchange of the case must have
been where the algorithm piece got
hidden somewhere. So the protagonist
drives after them and we get more fun
physics on the freeway. Some trash is
caught behind the wheels of the Saab.
Then the trash flies out in front. Nolan
adds so many visual details to try to
keep us in this inverted headsp space,
but again, it's all so much and it's so
hard for us to take it all in. I think
this movie was designed to be
appreciated and understood like on the
sixth or seventh watch. Now, while the
protagonist's crazy drive is happening,
that is when inverted seder transfers
from the Mercedes to the Audi to do the
reverse of leaving Cat behind to die.
But we don't see that in this moment. We
stay with the protagonist who speeds up
and catches up to inverted Seder in the
inverted Audi to the moment before that,
the handoff. Sader's eyes go wide as he
sees a doppelganger of the protagonist,
who he realizes must also be an inverted
form of him suddenly appearing there,
and he sees the algorithm piece wiggling
out from where it was back to the
forward moving protagonist hand in the
BMW. Seder then reverse catches the
orange suitcase, sending it back to the
normal protagonist, and he forces his
driver to veer into the Saab, flipping
it. And so in this moment, the inverted
protagonist realized, [__] the
overturned car that flipped back on its
wheels that I saw before was my own
inverted future self. And by driving
back into this handoff, I showed Seder
where the algorithm piece was hidden. It
was his destiny either way. What
happened happened, but it must feel like
a defeat nonetheless to the protagonist.
Seder taunts the protagonist that he saw
this handoff. You need to get my pulse
above 130. No one's done that before,
not even my wife. He's phrasing it like
sex never got him that excited, but
really he's referring to his heart rate
while abusing her with his belt. Sader
tosses a lighter in the gas to blow up
the protagonist's car, but because
thermodynamics are inverted, extreme ice
forms instead. Now, did Seder know that
he would not be burning the protagonist
to death? I assume yes, because someone
from Siberia would know that extreme
cold can be just as deadly. The
protagonist was lucky that Ives and the
rest of the group found him and space
blanketed him up before he died of
hypothermia. The protagonist wakes up in
this enclosed inverted shipping
container with Neil and Cat on a ROSS
ship headed back to Oslo. The
protagonist asks Neil how deep he is in
the tenant organization. Recorded Jul
can't possibly do you any good to know
that right now. I love how Robert Patson
says this. It's not defensive, but with
just a bit of exasperated patience
because he's talking to a younger
version of his future boss and mentor,
and he needs the boss to stay focused on
the mission. After some time on this
boat, the protagonist feels a pain
starting to form in his arm. This is
from the scuffle he's about to have with
his forward moving past self in Oslo.
Neil explains that the algorithm is a
nine-part physical representation of a
mathematical equation in the future that
future scientists want so that they can
invert the entire world's flow of time.
Normally, because the world's
environment always flows forward in
time, inverted random objects effects
are just kind of temporary and
ultimately corrected. But if the whole
world's entropy is inversed, Neil says,
the result would be that the present and
past are destroyed instantly. So how
would that work? If you're right here,
position.
This movie doesn't really say. One
interpretation is that environmentally
the effects of climate change from human
impact are reversed over time. But
logically, that might not even work
because if the whole world inverted that
polluted future world would stay
polluted theoretically. Like if you're a
human being with a tumor and you go
through a turnstyle gate, it's not like
your whole body reversed is going to
have that tumor shrink and shrink and
shrink over time. You're still going to
have that tumor. The tumor is also
reversed and will continue to grow. So
another interpretation that I really
love is that the orbital path of earth
around the sun would suddenly move in
the opposite direction, leaving the
forward moving earth still on its
original path. And in 6 months, the two
doppelganger Earths will collide into
each other on that orbital path. Or we
could take this to mean that after the
future scientists get their hands on the
completed algorithm, they invert their
whole world and that just kind of
magically erases everything in the past
to give those future scientists a blank
slate to claim as their own destiny.
Now, in the script, Seder tells Cat
while looking at the sunset in Vietnam,
"Tomorrow the sun will rise in that same
spot for the first time in history
because I told it to." The line is not
in the film, but it indicates that Seder
at least believes the algorithm will
invert Earth's rotation and perhaps also
its orbit around the sun. We don't know
if he means the entire cosmos itself
will invert back to the big bang or
anything. I think Neil means this as
more of a thermodynamic issue. Like
inverting a whole planet on that scale
will screw with the laws of physics and
gravity and thermodynamics so much that
it just instantly devastates everything
within that range in all periods of time
and the history of that planet. At least
that's the tenant organization's belief
based on the future Oppenheimer of her
time who invented the technology and hid
pieces of the algorithm into the past.
Neil in the protagonist debates the
grandfather paradox. But in the future,
those in power clearly believe you can
kick grandpa downstairs, gouge his eyes
out, sit his throat without consequence.
So the protagonist asks if this is what
would actually happen. Doesn't matter.
They believe it. And Neil also says that
just because they are here right now
doesn't mean that they've won this war.
In a parallel world theory, we can't
know the relationship between
consciousness and multiple realities. So
here Neil is saying they don't know
which of the eight time travel types
they're living in. If it's a multiverse,
the two of their lives could still end
up in fiery destruction. So we have to
ask, why do these future scientists
think this is a good idea? Sure.
Are the future scientists crazy? Is this
whole movie illogical and stupid? No, I
don't think so. But Christopher Nolan
seems to believe that humanity often is
illogical and stupid and will be
increasingly illogical and stupid in the
future. Later on in this film, Seder
will hint at the climate crisis that the
future will find itself in. How could
they want to kill us? Because their
oceans rose and their rivers ran dry.
Don't you see? They have no choice but
to turn back. They're responsible. No
choice implies a future society driven
to the point of desperation, blinded by
irrational anger at the past. So again,
we are to assume that tenant is an
analogy for the invention of the atomic
bomb. The atomic bomb was invented in an
era when our brightest minds were
terrified of an existential threat. They
believed that that was the only option.
So imagine a future so driven to the
extremes by climate crisis and famine,
plagues, epidemics, mass starvation,
water wars. Imagine the planet's
population has reduced significantly and
humans are close to going extinct. The
few scientists left in that dystopia,
burnt out after trying anything else,
would finally cave and convince
themselves that they had to try
something crazy and extreme, illogical,
insanely risky, a last resort to save
the human species. That's how they would
have settled on this crazy plan of
worldwide inversion. And the fact that
the future scientist's plan is so
illogical is, I believe, this movie's
commentary on how crazy and desperate
human society can become. When we grow
over reliant on technology to solve our
problems and stop relying on basic human
decency, recognizing that the audience
is likely feeling confused at this
point, this scene asks, "Is your head
hurt yet?" Yes.
Trust me. Ah. Many point to this look
that Neil gives Cat as a possible clue
that Neil is a grown-up version of Max,
Cat's son, but there's a lot of things
you can look at at this movie to justify
that theory. So, their shipping
container arrives at the Oslo airport
where they now plan to use the chaos
from the crash and the breach to slip
back into the ROS vault. Nolan uses the
audio cues of the sirens first, meaning
the last of the ambulances would have
just left the airport. And then we hear
the start of the jet engines, meaning
that 747 crash would be more recent and
the plane was still hot. The
protagonist's arm pain gets worse and he
finds a cut in his sleeve and then he
starts to bleed as if the reverse of
clotting. This is kind of a human injury
form of the broken side view mirror in
the freeway sequence. A bit of physical
damage that gets worse and worse as we
get closer and closer to the moment it
happens. In the case of this injury, the
injury itself is still forward moving
because it was caused by the
protagonist's forward moving
counterpart. So, they head out into the
chaos of the fire crew fighting the
flames, correctly guessing that in this
scramble, the firemen would be more
focused on the fire than a couple of
weirdos running backward with a gurnie.
For all the firefighters know, it's
emergency personnel backing away in fear
of the flames, too afraid to take the
time to turn around and run properly.
And we don't realize this until a few
moments from now. But the yellow
ambulance parked to the left in this
moment is actually the protagonist's
future forward moving self on the other
side of the turn style they're about to
go through, waiting for Neil and Cat on
the other side of that turn style. But
as they approach the fire hoses, the
spray shuts off right before they cross
into its path. Which means that from the
firefighters point of view, they waited
for these randos to clear out of the
way. They started hosing in this area.
The 747 crash was Nolan's one of two
total Cesile B Deile shots of this
movie, and I love how he found a way to
get double his money's worth out of it
by palenroing back to it. Now, the
reversed water spraying seems like an
impossible shot to me since the
protagonist and Neil are definitely
running forward in the same frame. I
feel like Christopher Nolan must have
cheated a little and used VFX for the
inverted water. Like, he didn't
composite the protagonist and Neil into
a reverse shot. Those firefighter extras
are all clearly stuntmen committing to a
physically reverse movement. Here we see
the post explosion jet engine worring
back up, meaning this would be right
after it exploded. And they brace for
impact because that explosion itself was
forward moving and the blast would still
move outward and blow the protagonist
back through the newly formed breach.
And now as we return to this moment,
Christopher Nolan keeps us in the sounds
from within the inverted protagonist
helmet. just his breathing and the
muffled sounds of the forward moving
protagonist and forward moving Neil
arguing.
[Music]
And now we know how forward moving
protagonist ended up pinning his
inverted counterpart earlier. The
inverted protagonist initially didn't
know what the hell was going on in the
scuffle as his forward moving self was
further along in the fight and had
gotten wiser to what exactly he was
fighting. So here from our point of
view, the inverted protagonist is taking
more hits and he scrambles more. But
then Nolan shows us the exact moment the
confidence flip happens.
[Music]
Right there on that arm grab is the
moment the inverted protagonist realizes
what he is doing. And from here forward
we see the inverted protagonist get more
and more in control of the fight and the
forward moving protagonist get less and
less confident. Part of that confidence
flip is also the inverted protagonist
remembering perhaps through muscle
memory how he had tried to overpower
himself in the past. So now inverted
protagonist successfully blocks each of
the forward moving protagonist blows and
we see those power blocks from his point
of view. And we also see how each of his
blows are non-lethal because the
inverted protagonist is taking great
pains to not injure his past self. Then
we get back to the turnstyle chamber to
the moment the forward movie protagonist
stabs his arm and then the four gunshots
into the proving window.
So why does the inverted protagonist
even fire these shots? Well, each time
you'll notice he doesn't shoot until his
forward moving counterpart has already
moved his head out of the way. So
really, I think he does it to empty the
clip before his forward moving
counterpart gets a hold of that gun. I
mean, if this weren't such a chaotic,
physically violent scramble, he would
have remembered that no one ended up
getting shot here. Like, that was just
the fate of this moment. But, you know,
when you're in the middle of it, you
don't think that way. Then, the inverted
protagonist looks back through the
proving window at the door, waiting for
his other self. And that's the
hesitation that we pointed out before
that the forward moving protagonist
takes advantage of. Forward moving
protagonist gets the gun and inverted
protagonist dismantles that gun. And now
finally seeing his other self in the
proving window, he leaps into the turn
style justifying why earlier in the
movie his past self came out of the turn
style with his back facing out. Now
another little mystery this movie
doesn't explicitly answer.
How does a turn style turn on whenever
it's used? Is there some kind of lever
or button inside that both sides
activate and hold down when they're both
in place to close the door and initiate
the rotation? I looked at all the shots
in this movie inside of the turning
chamber. No one touches anything along
the walls of it. So, I kind of like the
idea that the door itself is kind of
automated to open and close on its own.
Maybe through weight sensors or motion
sensors or maybe just a kind of Destiny
or fate as this is based on Maxwell and
Kelvin's demon door. Maybe an evil
little magic that opens and shuts a door
when destiny feels so inspired. So, we
follow the protagonist into the past in
a now forward moving world. We better
understand the protagonist exhaustion as
Neil catches up to him and removes his
mask. And now, after realizing who it
is, rushes back to get to the other
protagonist. Why does he run? Perhaps he
thinks it's his destiny to go break up
the other two and keep one from killing
the other. As the newly freed
protagonist rounds the corner, you can
start to see his two wrestling other
selves in the background spilling over
past the distant corner. And one other
question that I think we all just take
for granted while watching this sequence
and its earlier version,
why do they fight? Why does the
protagonist immediately go into physical
combat mode the moment he runs into just
a mystery masked man? Why not give him
the benefit of the doubt? Why not react
just like, "Whoa, mystery dude who
popped out of this mystery sader
treasure vault." you just bumped into
me, but I don't know who or what the
hell you are, so maybe just be on your
way and ask for an apology. Like, I know
why all future versions of a protagonist
have to defensively block and parry the
blows, but why is it initially
necessary? Why is it the protagonist
destiny to fight his future self? Well,
I see this as the protagonist's arc in
this movie to go from doubt to faith.
From distrusting everything and seeing
every player as a hostile double agent
to later on in his life believing that
everything will work out if he just
follows his instincts to trust players
and confidently forge the relationships
that he knows he will be able to
continue building in the future. So
therefore, act one protagonist
instinctively fights every mystery
player of this game. But acts three, the
protagonist learns to believe and trust
every mystery and have faith. The
protagonist runs through the garage
door, passing inverted Neil, who's now
minutes before the jet engine explodes.
Nolan edits the moment they pass each
other by switching from forward moving
protagonist point of view to inverted
Neil's point of view. And we hear the
word go twice, once forward moving go to
another time inverted. Og
[Music]
because inverted Neil sees forward
moving protagonist as to him reversed.
inverted Neil cart's inverted cat inside
the hallied gas sprays so he knows this
is the moment his past forward moving
self and forward moving protagonist are
about to come out of the sealed art
vault which Neil now sees reversed from
his point of view inverted Neil carts
Cat into the turnstyle room which we
initially see from inverted Neil's point
of view at his forward moving self in
the proving window now joining him in
the turnstyle they invert and now find
themselves forward moving in the past
after the 747 crash but before its
damaged engine explodes as their
ambulance pulls away. You can see
inverted protagonist and inverted Neil
with cat on the cart from the moment
they emerged from the shipping container
at the start of this little temporal
pinser at the Oslo turn style. All the
details are just so neatly tied up in
this movie. Neil explains to the
protagonist that he didn't tell him that
he saw his face under the mask all the
way back then because he's falling back
on faith. What's happened's happened. So
now they're about 9 days before Talon
but 2 days before the protagonist's
second meeting with Priya in Mumbai. The
protagonist wants to meet Priya before
that to tell her not to tell his other
self that the artifact is P241, but
rather tell him the truth that it's
actually something way worse so that he
wouldn't risk dangling it out in front
of Seder and Talon a week after that.
So, he catches up with Priya in Oslo at
what's called in script an Oslo war
memorial, but they actually shot this at
the real life Marame World War II
memorial in Talon, Estonia. I'm sorry if
I pronounced that wrong. In either case,
this being a memorial for World War II,
a war that ended with atomic bombs,
serves as a fitting backdrop for what
Priya now explains. The protagonist says
the magic word of algorithm, and now
Priya knows for sure that he's further
along in his timeline and knows enough
of the big picture for a full briefing.
She recalls the Manhattan Project and J.
Robert Oppenheimer's concern that before
the first Trinity test, they might
produce a chain reaction that would
destroy the world. Of course,
Christopher Nolan would explore that
anxiety over that possibility. quantum
microscopic detail in the Oppenheimer
film a few years after this. The
protagonist says that we got lucky in
the 20th century. But in this reality,
that chain reaction did continue by
providing the future scientists with
radioactive hotspots in which to operate
and locate an ally in the past to help
them reassemble the algorithm. So in a
way, it did end up destroying the world.
Priya explains that the woman who
invented the algorithm that could invert
the world, unlike Oppenheimer, listened
to her conscience and hid the algorithm
in nine separate pieces in nuclear
containment facilities, built a top
underground hypo centers where bombs
were tested underground, making them now
hotspots that would stay radioactive for
a millennia. Pria reminds us that there
are nine nuclear powers. Now, for
reference to you, those nine countries
are the United States, which gained this
power in 1945. The USSR, now Russia,
which gained this power in 1949. The
United Kingdom, which gained this power
in 1952, France, which gained it in
1960, China, which gained it in 1964,
Israel, which has never confirmed
whether they have the bombs for sure,
but is widely believed to, gaining the
power sometime in the late60s. India,
which gained its power in 1974,
Pakistan, which gained its power in
1998, and North Korea, which gained its
power in 2006. And that would mean that
seder might have dug up all nine pieces
from radioactive burial sites in any of
these nine countries. Neil said that the
soil that they found in the gold could
have been from Europe or Asia. But it is
unlikely that any of these sites would
have been the Trinity site in Los Alamos
and New Mexico because that's arguably
the most famous testing site. Most of
the burial sites probably would have
been in Russia because the Soviet Union
was the most secretive and prolific with
their testing. And these are areas that
Seder probably would have less trouble
getting to as opposed to like a burial
site in North Korea. Once Sader has
gotten the last piece in Talon, Ria says
he would have all nine, which Priya says
she wanted to happen. That is the only
way he'll bring together the other
eight. I was supposed to steal it, then
lose it. Mission accomplished. But the
protagonist still has some leverage to
try to fix this his own way. He's the
only one in the tender organization who
knows when and where the algorithm
reassembly will take place and be
dropped for the future society to find.
He's the only one who knows that it will
be install 12. He uses this to force
Priya to let him use Cat in the next
step of the tenant mission to recover
the algorithm without Seder knowing.
Priya promises Cat and her son will be
safe. A promise that she will break and
it will cost her dearly. But Priya
confirms that the tenant organization
was not formed sometime years in the
past, but will be formed sometime in the
future, which tells us that most of the
organization is made up of people
comfortable spending long amounts of
time inverting. And of course, an
organization that must have its own turn
styles. I think that's an important
tenant for us to consider, especially if
you're skeptical that Neil might have
been able to be Max because yes, that
would have required him to spend decades
of his life on the inverted side of
reality. This is an organization that
has its home base being inverted. So,
now we move on to the Magna Viking, a
tug ship that we see moving in reverse
from Tronheim in Norway to somewhere in
Siberia through this wind farm in the
Barren Sea, which is between the Arctic
Circle and Finland and Russia. But they
actually shot this at an offshore wind
farm near Denmark. The protagonist is
doing pull-ups outside wearing a
respirator mask, allowing his air to be
inverted, showing how he is training his
muscles to learn how to operate when
things like gravity and wind resistance
are being inverted. Presumably, this is
also the wind farm where his past self
spent a lot of time sequestered in
isolation at the beginning of this film,
as I assume this waterway is well
patrolled by the tenant organization.
And it's just fitting that the
protagonist does pull-ups outside here,
just like he did pull-ups inside of the
wind turbines before. Neil and the
protagonist tell Cat that Sader's
fitness device works as a dead man's
switch so that when he dies, it will
trigger an email burst that will create
a digital record for posterity and
notify the future scientists the exact
location of the dead drop containing the
buried completed algorithm. It's why the
tenant organization hasn't risked
assassinating Seder until they know that
they are in possession of the algorithm.
Cat tells them that they have even less
time than they thought because Seder
plans to take his own life because he
has inoperable pancreatic cancer likely
an effect of digging in. so many
radioactive sites. And the three of them
deduce that he plans to end the world on
the 14th, 10 days before they are now
during his and Cat's holiday in Vietnam,
where she tried to make nice with him
one last time. Neil confirms he was in
Ukraine, but the Kiev are siege. How do
you know about that?
Now, Neil doesn't answer this question,
of course, because he was there in Kiev,
saving the protagonist with the inverted
bullet. But knowing that Seder was in
Ukraine is how they confirmed that it
must have been a future version of Seder
who flies back to the yacht. And that
must be the day it's all going to go
down. On the Magna Viking, we see
soldiers training for battle, including
inverted soldiers like Neil summoning a
non-inverted gun up to his hands. I'm
pretty sure Robert Patson did this in
reverse just because of the speed of his
head turning. We also see what I assume
in the background are forward moving
soldiers looking reverse from our point
of view, navigating a sealed off maze
within the Magna Viking that must
include normal flowing air. So, we come
to the day of the 14th. The protagonist
lines up with soldiers entering vertical
turnstyle gears. The proving window
being the floor beneath them leading to
a red lit tunnel below. Red light
meaning that they would now be going
from the blue inverted environment of
the rest of the enclosed ship back to
the red forward moving sections of it. I
just love the militaristic practicality
of this machine. It's a mobile turn
style that allows several individuals to
go in at once relatively quickly without
breaking a line or having to take a
break. Like within a few minutes you
could invert or revert a small army. And
that's exactly what they're doing here.
And it's all on a mobile warship of a
tugboat. Cat asks where Neil is and the
protagonist says he must have gone
through already. But the reality is Neil
never went through to revert to forward
moving on the ship. He just stayed
inverting with the blue team and
probably is already headed to the Stalsk
12 site. The protagonist wasn't told
this because all mission details were
compartmentalized by Ives and Wheeler
until right before the mission and
weren't even finalized until Wheeler
embarked on her inverted team's half of
the mission. The protagonist gives Cat a
burner phone and tells her that after
they succeed, if she ever feels
threatened to call the number on it,
state her location in the time, and then
hang up. Who gets the message?
Posterity. This is the phone that Cat
will call on in the final scene when she
sees Priya's car. And it's how the
protagonist will know to get the jump on
Priya and her guy. So, giving Cat this
phone is kind of a sign of faith by the
protagonist that their mission will
succeed. As the protagonist flies away
from the Magna Viking, he sees some blue
containers that were just dropped off on
the deck with inverted soldiers
reversing back into a container, which
means that these guys are exiting from
their point of view. And this is some of
the soldiers of the blue side of the
army returning to the ship after the
battle. So, the protagonist is curious
to see which of them survived and what
their injuries look like. Mahir returns
to the film to drive Cat's boat to the
Vietnam coast, proving he isn't just
Neil's guy in Oslo, but rather a utility
player within the tenant organization.
In fact, he could be one of the other
protagonists that Priya referred to when
she said the protagonist was a
protagonist. Cat swims back to Seder's
yacht to masquerade as a younger self,
counting on Seder's oldest self to be
doing the same to return to this yacht
for his final moments. The protagonist's
forward moving red team gets briefed by
Ives while Wheeler's inverted blue team,
who has already gone through this vision
from the inverted side, is being
debriefed, hidden from our view in these
blue containers. The two red soldiers in
front of the protagonist mutter that
they're not being allowed to see them
because their injuries and casualties
might scare the red team before their
side of the mission. Iive says that the
red team's briefing has the benefit of
the blue team's experience. Meaning
before he talked to the red soldiers, he
got intel from someone on blue what lies
ahead. We intercut to the briefing on
the blue side led by Wheeler seeing Neil
listening to it which happens about an
hour into the future before they moved
from the inverted side back through this
battle. Wheeler says, "If you are not at
the LC at zero, you are not willing." I
think Neil might know deep down that
he's never going to make it out of this
mission. Meanwhile, Ives explains that
part of the red team's job is to clear
and cover the landing zone so that blue
team can evacuate. He tells his group
that there is a turn style being used by
Seder's army so that they're going to be
facing a mixture of forward moving and
inverted hostiles and both forward
moving and inverted weaponry. He says
that their mission is to stall these
defenses just long enough and
convincingly failed to diffuse the bomb
above the hypercenter that's designed to
bury the algorithm. Keyword convincingly
because they need to look like they
sincerely tried to stop it but just
failed while a sneaky splinter group
would sneak in to extract the algorithm
and that's their real mission. But Ives
doesn't tell that part to the rest of
the group because no one can know what
the real mission is here. Just imagine
being a soldier in this army. How many
battles have they fought without knowing
the true objective of the mission, but
just believing in the cause enough to
still lay their lives down? Ives tells
the protagonist last second that only
the two of them are on that splinter
team since no one else in this army is
allowed to know what the algorithm even
is or what it would look like fully
assembled. Re-watching this movie, it's
impressive to see how need to know Ives
and the tenant organization are. All
information is told at just the precise
last second before any operatives would
have a chance to second guessess their
plans. Both teams are fied into Stalsk
12, giving us a look at this city. It's
a strip mind terrorist city with
surrealist architecture. Something that
almost looks like what might have been a
city of tomorrow back in the Soviet '7s
before it was abandoned. With it all
being in brown sand. It's kind of like
Nolan pulled some nightmarish concept
art from Cobb and Mal's limbo dream
state and Inception, a place erased from
time where the deadliest secrets are
buried. They actually shot this battle
near Eagle Mountain at Joshua Tree in
Southern California at an abandoned mine
that actually had many of these existing
structures already. The Chinook
helicopters carrying the red team land
and immediately the protagonist and his
side takes out the anti-aircraft guns
which then leads to the blue containers
landing and the inverted team reversing
back out and for the first time the
protagonist and the others get a sense
of how wounded the other side is. Then
we shift perspective to the blue side
and Ludvigoren's music shifts to sound
like we're in an inverted vibe.
The blue team's landing zone is at the
top of this hill above the hypocenter
cavern, timing their landing with a
detonation. But notice when they
approach, especially when you rewatch
this, you realize that Neil, Ives, and
the protagonist's eventual success is
shown right here. You can see a Humvey
towing two bodies moving in reverse
toward the explosion. We're going to see
later how this will be Neil towing out
Ives, the protagonist, and the
algorithm. As Neil's inverted blue team
moves through this battle, they see the
injured red team evacuating at their
landing zone, and many of the explosions
are reversed in their point of view. But
when we cut back to the red team, bigger
plumes of smoke are now seen as reversed
from their point of view as well,
showing that they were being caused by
inverted soldiers and inverted
artillery. Now, there is a crazy moment
when the Humvey that was at the top of
the blue team's hill when they landed
now reverses back down that hill, nearly
running over Neil, tripping pedestrian
landmines. This we later find out is
future forward moving Neil driving up to
the top of this hill, actually helping
himself and his blue team by setting off
some of these mines. Now, back on the
yacht, future Seder and future cat, both
pretend to be their younger selves. Both
trying to fool the other. both trying to
act like they're making peace after an
argument that would have just happened a
few minutes before when in fact for them
it was actually several weeks and the
fact that they had some time and some
alternate motivations might have been
the only reason why any kind of peace
happened. Though Seder does eye cat
curiously when she sits on the cushion
this was where she hid the gun that
she's going to use to kill him. Back in
the battle, an inverted protagonist with
an RPG reverts a missile back to the
18th floor which Ives commands to be
taken out. But the sprinting the
protagonist loves to do in every mission
gets the better of him here because he
steps on a piece of rubble before he
realizes that rubble was wobbling. And
the rubble suddenly lifts back upward
into an inverted explosion on the
building, nearly taking the protagonist
upward with it. The protagonist looks
overhead and sees an enemy helicopter
flying to another block. This is Volkov
flying in to place the trip wire at the
tunnel entrance, which inverted Neil
will later see the reversal of. Neil
notices some rubble moving and he warns
Wheeler to get out of an enclosure that
they realize is a recently created blast
crater. Wheeler escapes, but another
blue soldier gets trapped inside the
reforming concrete. With a tunnel
entrance in sight, the protagonist
realizes that they need a distraction to
get in without the enemy knowing that
they got in. And only now does I reveal
the master stroke that only Ives and
Wheeler knew about. and times to occur
at the exact midpoint of this 10-minute
mission. 5 minutes in, the protagonist
sees a collapsed tower whose base has
been destroyed beginning to rise back
up. And right at 5 minutes, both eyes
and Wheeler order to hit the building
with RPGs. Forward moving red side
hitting the top floors, and verted blue
side hitting the base to give us this
movie's second and even crazier ceil
shot.
I love this shot so much. You could say
it's a pointless spectacle designed to
just look cool and show off the
inversion effects of this movie, but in
the context of the scene, it actually
serves a true tactical purpose. It's
designed to turn the heads of every
soldier nearby in this battle and shadow
the entrance of the cave in dust and
debris so that no one will see Ives and
the protagonist running into this
entrance. So to pull up this effect, the
set construction crew actually built
this tower in many of the buildings of
Stallson 12 to be 30% scale models. They
actually built two 1/3 scale models of
this building to be exact replicas. One
to explode at the base, one to explode
at the top of it. And they shot both
explosions from the same angles in order
to match cut the explosions, showing one
forward moving and one reverse back to
back. They also constructed a full-size
version of this ruined building so that
they could establish the scale by having
soldiers running around it. So, as Ives
and the protagonist run for it, the
Humvey appears behind them, honking.
This, of course, is future Neil after he
reverted to forward moving, trying to
warn them about Volkov's trip wire.
Meanwhile, back on the yacht, Seder
holds up the CIA poison pill with the
silver capsule that I talked about at
the top of this video. The pills that
we're not sure if they even work or if
they're just testing placeos. But if
this is Seder, the furthest in the
future, he would have gotten this off of
one of the Americans tortured in Kiev.
Seder says, "The way the world ends, not
the little bank, but the whimper." He's
citing TS Elliot's poem, The Hollow Men,
which Elliot wrote in 1925 to comment on
World War I and the lingering
psychological impact of the war on the
returning soldiers. But the final words
of the poem would actually carry much
greater meaning after World War II as a
way of suggesting even in a nuclear
holocaust, not all of humanity will die
in the bang. The last of us will die in
a feeble whimper in the winter that
follows. This is the way the world ends.
This is the way the world ends. This is
the way the world ends. Not with a bang,
but with a whimper. Actually,
reportedly, when TS Elliot was asked in
1958 if he would write these lines again
after the hydrogen bomb had been
invented, Elliot said that he would not.
Cat flirtingly tells Seder not to take
this pill yet to just keep drinking
vodka with her. Now, remember, Seder
frowned slightly on that phone call to
the shore earlier, but now we learn it
was because his guy on the other line
said Cat was there with Max on the
shore, which Seder brings up now, just
kind of a little confused and amused.
and Cat lowers her head to keep Seder
from seeing into her eyes because as she
pointed out to the protagonist earlier,
Seder is very good at just noticing
little flashes of honesty in Cat's eyes.
The protagonist and Ives descend into
the hypocenter cavern to find a locked
gate with a dead blue soldier on the
other side. The protagonist recognizes
the coin and thread on his pack, but
Vulkov appears and knocks Ives out with
a shot to the helmet. Neil sees Volkov's
trip wire and sprints back to the stall
12 turnstyle. He sees his forward-ing
self in the proving window tunnel and
sees an opening. Now, as Neil
approaches, you can totally see his coin
catching the light. This shot comes
right after the protagonist finds the
dead soldier with the coin. So, if you
were watching closely the first time,
you can totally put it together right
here who that soldier is. But now, Neil
seemingly abandons Wheeler and the
others on the blue team to go do this.
But he does end up driving the Humvey up
the road to detonate mines to help them
after they land at the top of the hill.
For everything else, he later tells the
protagonist this. Didn't your team need
you? Get him on the next pass. Volkov
hangs a phone receiver for the
protagonist to talk to Seder. Seder
tells the protagonist that his knowledge
will die with him, buried in the tomb
like an anonymous Egyptian builder
sealed in the pyramid to keep a secret.
Then Seder marks his faith. Your faith
is blind. You're a fanatic. And he
shares with the protagonist what he
thinks is a very cleareyed faith using
imagery as if he's reading from a
biblical text. Somewhere sometime a man
in a crystalline tower throws a switch
and Armageddon is both triggered and
avoided. Now, in the script, Seder says
entropy inverts the same way the
magnetic poles have switched 183 times
over the millennia. The movie omits that
line, but it is true that in the last 83
million years, Earth's magnetic north
and south have flipped seemingly at
random 183 times, which Seder might use
to justify simply starting another cron
of time for a new era to take over.
Nolan might have just left out this bit
of geological history to not get too
scientific about it. That's why I think
Nolan left out Seder's script lines
about the magnetic poles of the planet
shifting and the sunset turning into a
sunrise and instead leaves this exchange
as a conversation about faith because
Seder says that his greatest sin was
bringing a son into the world that he
knew was ending, asking if he thinks God
would ever forgive him. Nolan also
leaves out the very cold scripted
follow-up line he should understand he
killed his own. Whoa. But the
protagonist says Seder doesn't believe
in God or anything outside of his own
experience. The rest is belief and I
don't have it. Without it, you're not
human. You're just a mad man or a god
of sorts. So here the protagonist states
the thematic lesson he has begun to
understand in this movie. Humanity's
belief in power outside of their own
experience is what makes us human. We
need faith. If not faith in God, then at
least faith in each other. Sader orders
Volkov to shoot the protagonist to the
head, and he stays on the call just long
enough before a cat hangs it up to hear
a gunshot, which is what reassures him
that all is going according to plan. But
it isn't, because that gunshot that was
meant for the protagonist instead goes
into the dead blue soldier who rises to
absorb the bullet and is now alive
again, opening the lock and holding open
the gate. Since we now know that this is
Neil, anyone looking for clues that Neil
is the same person as Max could try to
connect some dots between Seder
comparing himself to sacrificing his son
to God sacrificing his son Jesus and a
script describing the soldier we later
learn as Neil as quote risen in this
moment. Now you may ask if inverted Neil
picked that lock, why was it locked when
the protagonist and Ives got to it
initially? Well, it's because after Neil
took that bullet, he was no longer able
to hold open the gate and it slammed
shut, reverting to being locked. He
needs to physically be holding it open
for them to go through. The protagonist
shoots Vulkov at first in the shoulder,
then in the back. They struggle, but the
protagonist manages to throw Volkov down
the hole and regain control of the
capsule, continue the algorithm along
with Ives. Cat, meanwhile, squirts some
sunscreen on the deck and hoses it and
smears some sunscreen on Seder's back to
make sure he's going to slip smoothly
off that deck. Unsure of the protagonist
success on his end of the mission, Cat
decides to trust her own faith or at
least spend her final moments alive
taking control of the moment and
revealing her true self to Seder. You
vengeful [__] you scarred on the
outside.
The look Kenneth Brana brings to Sader's
face is the same wideeyed shock that he
gave inverted the protagonist back on
the freeway. It's a look that says,
"Fuck, someone learned how to play this
game better than me." She shoots him and
slides him off the deck. And we get a
great Titanic propeller blade smack to
let us know he did.
Ah,
Neil drops a tow line to Ives and the
protagonist in the hypoenter and he guns
it. Boom. They get out of the hole, but
they do get initially swallowed in the
imploding Earth until Neil sees the two
of them in the rearview mirror plus the
algorithm successfully out with no one
else in sight and Sader dead. So,
mission is accomplished. Cat dives off
the yacht, closing the loop as she
becomes the destined mystery woman that
the past version of herself saw. Had
that past self not seen that mystery
diver, who knows if Cat would have been
soured enough on Seder soon enough to
give up on their marriage and let the
protagonist in at the right time. Again,
grandfather paradox, right? Cat and
Mahir tow away Seder's body, knowing
that they can't let anyone find this
corpse, and the world needs to think he
just disappeared. Ives, the protagonist,
and Neil are left with the assembled
nine-piece algorithm. This is our first
good look at this linear 3D puzzle in
the daylight. Altogether, it looks
rather like a car's crankshaft, which
makes a bit of sense as this algorithm
is a kind of component required to keep
the internal combustion engine of a
future inverted world flowing. What we
are really seeing though is a physical
representation of a mathematical
algorithm that can be somehow derived
from each of these nine irregular pieces
screwed in the right way with each other
that would make this whole thing
impossible to copy unless you would be
physically holding it all together. And
I like that there's a certain analog
simplicity to it. But this ugly, clunky
design, I think, is our one clue of what
the future of this world really looks
like. Meaning, it's not aspirational or
sleek or crystalline as Cedar imagined
it, but it's just darkly functional, a
brutalist tech dystopia. And we find
ourselves in something of a Mexican
standoff as I considers whether to kill
the protagonist and Neil for merely
seeing the algorithm. But he realizes he
can't trust himself 100% better than he
could trust in himself plus the
protagonist and Neil 33% each. So, he
splits it up. The implication being
don't ever get too comfortable. Don't
plan on living a long life where you can
grow old and like fall in love and tell
some grandkid about this old relic that
you have in the closet. No. Make
yourself hard to find. Bury the three
pieces you have somewhere impossible to
find and then off yourself before you
grow too foolish and tell someone or too
vulnerable and let it get tortured out
of you. Neil asks the protagonist if
he's headed back to London to check on
Cat, which protagonist says is too
dangerous even from afar. But I think
there's something in Neil's tone that
suggests h maybe you should. I think
it's another possible clue that he is
Max and he grew up with his mom having
some mystery guardian angel watching
over their backs. Neil reveals that he
will be the mystery locksmith who takes
the bullet for the protagonist, which
the protagonist concludes from the coin
on his pack and recalls that this was
also the mystery man who saved him back
in the Kiev opera house. His own
guardian angel who has been saving him
who knows how many times. It's me in
there again
weaving another past in the fabric of
this mission. The image of weaving a
timeline into the fabric of reality in
my head cannon might be how the
protagonist as the future boss of this
tenant network derived this gesture as
the sign for the organization because
that is what they are all doing. They're
making the world safer and more united
by stitching together fabric more and
more and more in order to keep it from
tearing. The protagonist asks if they
can change things if they do it
differently. But Neil reminds him what's
happened's happened which is an
expression of faith in the mechanics of
the world.
It's not an excuse to do nothing. So we
come back to the idea of faith. By
naming his lead hero only the
protagonist. Christopher Nolan may be
referencing one of the most important
works in the English language. A play
called Everyman that was written
sometime in the early 16th century by an
anonymous English playwright. It's a
morality play that was performed on
traveling pageant wagons outside of
churches in the Middle Ages. an allegory
in which the lead character named every
man is meant to represent how all of
humanity should try to live a moral life
and avoid sin. Similarly, I think the
protagonist naming choice is meant to be
a prescription by Nolan on how to deal
with the constant dread that we are
living in a twilight world on the
unfortunate side of an open Pandora's
box, having to toil and toil to stave
off that final sunset by just one more
day. Will it be nuclear annihilation?
Will it be endless climate crisis? How
do we proceed knowing that's what's
ahead of us? Well, faith. Faith that it
will all work out. That the fact that
we're alive right now means that there
is at least hope that we could be living
in a happy ending reality. But that
faith and hope is not an excuse to do
nothing. We have to keep trying to
fortify that happy ending and to weave
the reality we wish to be living in. And
how fitting is it that the gesture for
tenant is also a universal gesture for
two hands clasped in prayer. The
protagonist realizes that he is the one
who recruited Neil when Neil was a
younger age. An older version of the
protagonist was and this is something
Neil knew the entire time. So that in a
way both of them recruited each other
into this game. Policy is to suppress.
Whose policy?
I was my friend. And here Neil brings
back that sign of friendship as Nolan
references the famous final line of
Casablanca. Louie, I think this is the
beginning of a beautiful friendship for
me. I think this is the end of a
beautiful friendship. The protagonist is
only halfway into his friendship with
Neil. And there's a whole lifetime of
adventures and missions and saves that
these two will embark upon. We live in a
Twilight world and the protagonist will
have faith that what he went through
will be the perfect primer for a future
partnership. The protagonist began this
journey distrusting every player of the
game who pops out of a demon door as a
demon who needs to be destroyed. But he
ends this journey seeing himself a
fellow protagonist and every stranger of
this game board someone to trust on
faith that they're an angel here to help
him. And this notion of an expression of
faith in the mechanics of the world but
not an excuse to do nothing is also a
fitting prescription from Christopher
Nolan in how to watch this movie. Just
have faith in the feeling of it, but
also you're gonna have to do some work
to get the most out of this. And if
you've watched this far into the video,
I suspect you're one of those online
psychos I've identified so hard with.
Those of us who have watched Tenant 7 to
eight times, who watched every video
analysis, read every subreddit post and
thread. Because on that ninth watch, you
realize, good lord, this is an
intricately dense puzzle that does get
richer in its complexity. Even though I
think we should admit this is not that
great of a movie, but it remains a
brilliant thought experiment that one of
the best filmmakers tried to execute
using the language of cinema executed at
the highest level of skill by artists at
the top of their game. So we return to
Neil's lines to the protagonist that was
earlier in the drive away from the Oslo
airport. A closing monologue that plays
over what we see in this final scene.
They're the people saving the world from
what might have been.
Well would never know what could have
happened. And even if they did, they
wouldn't care. I love the idea. by the
way that after Neil and the protagonist
clasped hands in that ambulance, Neil
just kept going on waxing poetic about
how they're committed to fighting this
shadow war that they received no laurels
for. The Schrodinger's cats people
forgot about and the speech has echoed
in the protagonist's mind throughout his
life. The phone that the protagonist
gave Cat comes back in this final
sequence. This loose end as Priya tries
to kill her outside of Max's school, but
the protagonist shows up killing Priya's
assassin and reminds her what they
talked about tying up loose ends. But
Priya didn't realize that the superior
she was reporting to was a future
version of him.
to die up those loose ends.
From saying mission accomplished and
earlier telling the others, "Ignorance
is our anti- mission." We have seen an
evolution throughout this film of the
protagonist gradually becoming the true
boss of the tenant organization. Cat
walks off with her son Max and we hear
Neil's closing words. That's the bomb
that didn't go off. The danger no one
knew is real. That's the bomb with the
real power to change the world. The fact
that we are hearing Neil over the shot
of Max is for many enough proof that Max
is the same person as Neil will grow up
to be him. Especially if you consider
Max's full name could be Maxillian and
the last four letters are Neil when you
invert them. I don't know if I've ever
bought that. For what it's worth, here's
what Christopher Nolan has said about
the Max equals Neil theories. I don't
allow myself to comment on fan theories
anymore. And I made the mistake many
years ago and showed Momento with the
first ever audience who saw it. And in
the press conference afterwards, they
asked me about my interpretation of the
ending. And I said, well, the important
thing is it's ambiguous. It's
unknowable, but yeah, what I think is
blah blah blah. And my brother Jonah
took me aside after that and said, "You
can never do that again." I said, "But I
but I said it's ambiguous." He said, "No
one listened to that." So if you're
looking for ambiguity, if you're looking
for open possibilities, you have to keep
your mouth shut. And that is why
Christopher Nolan will never give us a
tease for how to interpret his endings
like the spinning top of Inception or
this final shot of Max. So, I need to
confess to you all now that I started
writing this video back in September
2024. From the start of this video to
right now, you might be able to see the
passage of time on this face. My life,
my outlook has changed throughout the
course of shooting this. I think I've
become a different, maybe a better movie
analyzer since the opening minute of
this video. I was wiser analyzing the
end of this movie than I was the
beginning of it. And while doing this, I
dragged the deep dive channel to a halt
until I could finish this video. So, was
it worth it to spend over 9 months of my
life on what many consider to be the
worst Christopher Nolan film? A better
question might be, was Tenet worth
Christopher Nolan's time? Of course it
was. I believe that without Tenant,
Nolan never would have made Oenheimer,
never would have made his Oscar winner.
Because after he celebrated and praised
the World War II generation with his
film Dunkirk, Christopher Nolan was
clearly wrestling with the great minds
of the supposed greatest generation,
unable to not hold him accountable for
unleashing what might be the inevitable
instrument of humanity's destruction.
When we watch Tennet, we are seeing a
great filmmaker pondering, "What if a
Cold era 007 film was instead an
espionage thriller of spies trying to
undo the Manhattan Project and villains
trying to make sure it did happen?" And
by Oppenheimer deep dive, I suggested
that the greatest regret of Christopher
Nolan's career would be inventing the
idea of a billion-dollar superhero
movie. He does seem to have issues with
the filmmaker he used to be, but in
Tenet, I believe he arrives at an
answer. I'm only at the beginning of my
career, and I cannot change the past.
What's happened has happened, but that's
not an excuse to do nothing. I must keep
toiling to ensure that this world is on
the right path. Nolan's version of
toiling is making the best films he can
possibly make, not taking any shortcuts,
inspiring a great crew to meet him at
his level, avoiding using CGI, shooting
on IMAX film, and showing his work with
insane attention to detail that can only
be caught by looping back to each scene
on future rewatches. And I hope that I
have come close to doing the YouTube
film analysis equivalent of exactly that
in this video. But I didn't do it alone.
A team of talented editors and
production crew, a company willing to
let me spend time doing this. And if you
were looking closely, some special help
from one particular friend at Dust who
left nine algorithmic pieces of wisdom
to himself gained only after 9 months of
insight. Because my work is only halfway
done. Successfully coming to the end of
a nearly 2-hour YouTube analysis is not
an excuse to do nothing. I see this as
the beginning of a beautiful deep dive.
Who's because he doesn't have faith yet?
Destiny demon magic
because they have no other choice.
It would just break everything.
It goes in the backseat of the sun.
Yes, but they have to make sure that
happens.
He was the only man for that job.
Christopher Nolan got bored with Bond
movies.
But uh thanks for watching.
[Music]